The Neural Basis of Error Detection: Conflict Monitoring and
the Error-Related Negativity
Nick Yeung
Princeton University
Matthew M. Botvinick
University of Pennsylvania
Jonathan D. Cohen
Princeton University and University of Pittsburgh
According to a recent theory, anterior cingulate cortex is sensitive to response conflict, the coactivation
of mutually incompatible responses. The present research develops this theory to provide a new account
of the error-related negativity (ERN), a scalp potential observed following errors. Connectionist simu￾lations of response conflict in an attentional task demonstrated that the ERN—its timing and sensitivity
to task parameters—can be explained in terms of the conflict theory. A new experiment confirmed
predictions of this theory regarding the ERN and a second scalp potential, the N2, that is proposed to
reflect conflict monitoring on correct response trials. Further analysis of the simulation data indicated that
errors can be detected reliably on the basis of post-error conflict. It is concluded that the ERN can be
explained in terms of response conflict and that monitoring for conflict may provide a simple mechanism
for detecting errors.
Errors are an important source of information in the regulation
of cognitive processes. The mechanism by which people detect and
correct their errors has been the object of study for many years, but
research interest has increased in recent years following the dis￾covery of neural correlates of performance monitoring. In partic￾ular, studies of event-related brain potentials (ERPs) have revealed
a neural response following errors that has been labeled the error￾related negativity (ERN or Ne; Falkenstein, Hohnsbein, Hoorman,
& Blanke, 1990, 1991; Gehring, Goss, Coles, Meyer, & Donchin,
1993). The most likely neural generator of the ERN is anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), an area that in recent years has been
implicated in another function related to the evaluation of perfor￾mance, monitoring for competition (or conflict) during information
processing. The present research attempts to provide an integrative
account of error- and conflict-related activity observed in anterior
cingulate cortex. Specifically, we propose a new account of the
ERN and error processing in terms of the conflict monitoring
theory of anterior cingulate function.
Background
Behavioral Studies of Error Monitoring
Participants in reaction time (RT) experiments are typically
aware of their errors, reacting to them with visible or audible
frustration. When asked, they are also able to signal their errors
more systematically with an appropriate key-press (Rabbitt, 1966,
1967, 1968). Using this method, Rabbitt and colleagues have
found that participants can detect most, though rarely all, of the
errors they make in simple choice RT tasks (Rabbitt, 1968, 2002).
However, these error-signaling responses can be quite slow and
unreliable. In a study by Rabbitt (2002), for example, young adults
detected 79% of their errors, taking an average of about 700 ms to
do so, when they were given a second to respond before the next
stimulus appeared. However, when the subsequent stimulus ap￾peared 150 ms after an incorrect response, the same participants
showed a limited ability to ignore this stimulus, as they were
instructed to do, and their error-detection rate dropped to 56%.
Whereas explicit error detection and signaling appear to be slow
and effortful, error correction is fast and relatively automatic.
Participants deal with errors more quickly and efficiently by pro￾ducing a correcting response—that is, making the response they
should have made—than by making a common detection response
to all errors (Rabbitt, 1968, 1990, 2002). Indeed, errors are often
immediately followed by a correcting response even when partic￾ipants are instructed to suppress such responses (Maylor & Rab￾Nick Yeung, Department of Psychology, Princeton University; Matthew
M. Botvinick, Department of Psychiatry and Center for Cognitive Neuro￾science, University of Pennsylvania; Jonathan D. Cohen, Department of
Psychology, Princeton University, and Department of Psychiatry, Univer￾sity of Pittsburgh.
Preliminary versions of this research were presented in poster format at
the conference on Executive Control, Errors, and the Brain (Jena, Ger￾many, September 2000), at the 7th International Conference on Functional
Mapping of the Human Brain (Brighton, England, June 2001), and at the
31st Annual Meeting of the Society of Neuroscience (San Diego, Califor￾nia, November 2001). We thank Mike Coles, Clay Holroyd, John Kounios,
Sander Nieuwenhuis, and Leigh Nystrom for comments on drafts of this
article; Joe Bussiere, Jack Gelfand, Mike Scanlon, and Dan Zook for help
in running the event-related brain potential experiment; and Richard
Greenblatt for technical advice.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Nick
Yeung, who is now at the Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. E-mail: nyeung@cmu.edu
Psychological Review Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association
2004, Vol. 111, No. 4, 931–959 0033-295X/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0033-295X.111.4.931
931
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
bitt, 1987; Rabbitt & Rodgers, 1977). These error-correcting re￾sponses can be extremely fast: Corrections are often observed
within 20 ms of the original incorrect response (Rabbitt, Cum￾ming, & Vyas, 1978), and in Rabbitt’s (2002) study, the mean time
to correct errors was around 250 ms.
Rabbitt and colleagues (Rabbitt et al., 1978; Rabbitt & Vyas,
1981) have explained fast, automatic error corrections in terms of
the continuous flow of perceptual information into the response
selection process (cf. C. W. Eriksen, Coles, Morris, & O’Hara,
1985; B. A. Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974; Gratton, Coles, Sirevaag,
Eriksen, & Donchin, 1988). They describe response selection as
involving accumulation of information over time, and they liken
this to the votes of a committee. On occasion, they suggest, an
incorrect decision will be made on the basis of incomplete infor￾mation, but “as subsequent votes come in, a more accurate con￾sensus will accumulate and the earlier mistake will become appar￾ent” (Rabbitt & Vyas, 1981, p. 225). An implication of this
hypothesis is that error correction (and detection) should depend
crucially on continued information processing after the initial
error. To test this hypothesis, Rabbitt and Vyas (1981) measured
error correction rate as a function of stimulus duration: As stimulus
duration is increased, and hence also the opportunity for further
processing, the rate of error correction should increase, and this is
exactly what Rabbitt and Vyas observed. Thus, participants’ abil￾ity to detect and correct errors appears to be critically linked to
their ability to continue processing the stimulus even after they
initiate a response.
The Error-Related Negativity
The behavioral findings reviewed above have been comple￾mented in recent years by data from neuroimaging techniques. In
particular, a great deal of interest has focused on the ERN, a
component of the ERP that is observed in association with incor￾rect responses (Falkenstein et al., 1990, 1991; Gehring et al.,
1993). The term error-related negativity has in fact been used to
label ERP components observed in at least three situations: fol￾lowing overt response errors in choice RT tasks (Falkenstein et al.,
1990, 1991; Gehring et al., 1993); following feedback about re￾sponse accuracy (Holroyd & Coles, 2002; Miltner, Braun, &
Coles, 1997); and following late responses in deadline RT tasks
(Johnson, Otten, Boeck, & Coles, 1997; Luu, Flaisch, & Tucker,
2000; Pailing, Segalowitz, & Davies, 2000). In this article, we are
concerned with the issue of how the cognitive system is able to
monitor its own performance in the absence of explicit feedback
(e.g., regarding accuracy or timing). That is, we are concerned with
the first of these situations, the observation of an ERP negativity
immediately following incorrect responses. Henceforth we use the
term ERN to refer specifically to this component. Thus defined, the
ERN is a negative deflection in the ERP that begins around the
time of incorrect responses, often slightly before, and peaks
roughly 100 ms thereafter (see Coles, Scheffers, & Holroyd, 1998;
Falkenstein, Hoorman, Christ, & Hohnsbein, 2000, for recent
reviews). We return in the General Discussion to the relationship
between this component and the related negativities observed
following feedback and late responses.
Although the ERN varies in amplitude across experimental condi￾tions, its latency seems to be very consistent (Falkenstein et al., 2000;
Leuthold & Sommer, 1999). The ERN has been observed following
errors regardless of the modality in which the stimulus is presented
(Falkenstein et al., 2000) and regardless of the modality in which the
response is made (Holroyd, Dien, & Coles, 1998). A number of
features of the ERN have been taken to suggest that it indexes some
form of error processing: Its amplitude is correlated with subjective
judgments of response accuracy (Scheffers & Coles, 2000), is in￾creased when response accuracy is emphasized over speed (Falken￾stein et al., 1990; Gehring et al., 1993), and is reduced following
incorrect responses to stimuli that are presented relatively infre￾quently, conditions in which errors are particularly likely (Holroyd &
Coles, 2002). The ERN also appears related to aspects of error
correction: Gehring et al. (1993) found that ERN amplitude correlates
positively with the probability that an error is immediately corrected,
and Rodrı´guez-Fornells, Kurzbuch, and Mu¨nte (2002) reported a
larger ERN when an error is corrected quickly than when the error
correction response is slow. There have also been attempts to correlate
ERN amplitude with the force with which the error is produced:
Gehring et al. (1993) found a negative correlation between these
measures, with a larger ERN following weakly produced errors.
However, a subsequent study found the opposite pattern, with larger
ERN amplitude associated with more forceful errors (Scheffers,
Coles, Bernstein, Gehring, & Donchin, 1996), a discrepancy that is
not currently well understood.
A commonly held view is that the ERN reflects a monitoring
process that signals errors whenever it detects a mismatch between
the response produced and the correct, or intended, response, as
determined by the state of the response system after the response
is executed (Coles, Scheffers, & Holroyd, 2001; Falkenstein et al.,
1990, 1991, 2000; Falkenstein, Hohnsbein, & Hoorman 1995;
Gehring et al., 1993; Scheffers & Coles, 2000; Scheffers et al.,
1996). This view is consistent with the error monitoring model
proposed by Rabbitt and colleagues (Rabbitt & Rodgers, 1977;
Rabbitt & Vyas, 1981). However, there is currently disagreement
as to whether the ERN reflects the error-detection process itself
(Coles et al., 1998; Falkenstein et al., 1991, 2000; Nieuwenhuis,
Ridderinkhof, Blom, Band, & Kok, 2001; Scheffers et al., 1996),
the arrival of the error signal at a remedial action system (Coles et
al., 2001; Holroyd & Coles, 2002), or an emotional response to the
error (Bush, Luu, & Posner, 2000; Gehring & Willoughby, 2002;
Pailing, Segalowitz, Dywan, & Davies, 2002). Moreover, there is
disagreement as to whether the representation of the correct or
intended response depends on the final outcome of the response
selection process (Falkenstein et al., 1990, 2000) or is determined
by the state of the response system at the time of response execu￾tion (Coles et al., 2001).
The ERN has a frontocentral distribution that is symmetrical to
the midline. Dipole modeling has consistently located its neural
source in medial frontal cortex, consistent with a neural generator
in ACC or the supplementary motor area (SMA; Dehaene, Posner,
& Tucker, 1994; Gehring, Himle, & Nisenson, 2000; Holroyd et
al., 1998). Convergent evidence favors ACC over SMA as the
most likely source. First, recordings in behaving monkeys have
found error-related activity in ACC and not SMA (Gemba, Sasaki,
& Brooks, 1986; although Stuphorn, Taylor, & Schall, 2000, have
observed error-related activity in the supplementary eye field dur￾ing an eye-movement task). Second, fMRI studies have found
error-related activity in ACC (e.g., Carter et al., 1998; Kiehl,
Liddle, & Hopfinger, 2000; Menon, Adleman, White, Glover, &
Reiss, 2001). Finally, it has been noted that the orientation of
932 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
pyramidal cells in the anterior cingulate sulcus could generate a
frontocentral negativity such as the ERN, whereas SMA cells on
the medial wall are oriented tangentially to the scalp and hence
would not be expected to produce a corresponding scalp potential
(Coles et al., 1998; Holroyd & Coles, 2002). Thus, these localiza￾tion studies have led to the hypothesis that ACC is involved in
detecting or responding to errors.
Response Conflict Monitoring
Although ACC activity has been observed in association with
errors, fMRI studies have found that caudal ACC regions activated
on error trials are typically also activated on trials when the
participant responded correctly (e.g., Carter et al., 1998; Kiehl et
al., 2000; Menon et al., 2001). More specifically, on trials with
correct responses, ACC activity has been observed in conditions in
which multiple responses compete for the control of action—that
is, when there is response conflict. In the flanker task (B. A.
Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), for example, participants are required to
make a discriminative response to a target stimulus, such as
responding to H with the left hand and S with the right hand. The
target is flanked by distractor stimuli that are associated either with
the same response as the target (congruent stimuli, e.g., HHHHH),
or with the opposite, conflicting response (incongruent stimuli,
e.g., SSHSS). RTs and error rates are typically higher in the
incongruent condition, the result of conflict during response se￾lection between the responses afforded by the target and distrac￾tors—that is, between the correct and incorrect responses (Coles,
Gratton, Bashore, Eriksen, & Donchin, 1985; Gratton et al., 1988).
Botvinick, Nystrom, Fissell, Carter, and Cohen (1999) used a
version of the flanker task in which participants were required to
respond to the orientation of an arrow stimulus flanked by arrows
pointing in the same direction (congruent stimuli, e.g.,   ) or
in the opposite direction (incongruent stimuli, e.g.,   ). They
observed ACC activity even on trials with correct responses, and this
activity was greater for high-conflict, incongruent trials than for
low-conflict, congruent trials. Findings such as these have led to the
development of the conflict monitoring theory of ACC function
(Botvinick, Braver, Carter, Barch, & Cohen, 2001; Botvinick et al.,
1999; Carter et al., 1998). According to this theory, ACC is respon￾sible for detecting conflict during response selection and conveying
this information to brain regions directly responsible for the control of
cognitive processing (e.g., lateral prefrontal cortex, Cohen, Botvinick,
& Carter, 2000). Dealing with conflict, or crosstalk, in information
processing has been proposed to be a central function of cognitive
control (Allport, 1980, 1987; Neumann, 1987; Norman & Shallice,
1986): The presence of response conflict indicates situations in which
errors are likely and, hence, in which attention is required. Thus,
conflict monitoring may provide crucial information in regulating
cognitive processing (Cohen et al., 2000). In addition, conflict mon￾itoring is computationally straightforward, simply requiring the de￾tection of concurrently active incompatible responses.
The conflict monitoring theory provides a unified account of
neuroimaging findings of ACC activation in a wide range of task
conditions associated with increased task difficulty (cf. Paus, Ko￾ski, Caramanos, & Westbury, 1998). For example, ACC is acti￾vated when participants perform the Stroop task (e.g., Bench et al.,
1993; MacDonald, Cohen, Stenger, & Carter, 2000; Pardo, Pardo,
Janer, & Raichle, 1990), when participants are required to produce
infrequent responses in the face of more habitual ones (e.g.,
Braver, Barch, Gray, Molfese, & Snyder, 2001; Bush et al., 2000;
Carter et al., 1998; Garavan, Ross, Murphy, Roche, & Stein, 2002;
Kiehl et al., 2000; Menon et al., 2001; Paus, Petrides, Evans, &
Meyer, 1993; Rubia et al., 2001; Taylor, Kornblum, Minoshima,
Oliver, & Koeppe, 1994), and when they are required to choose
between many valid responses in word generation tasks (Barch,
Braver, Sabb, & Noll, 2000; Crosson et al., 1999; Thompson￾Schill et al., 1997).
Conflict Monitoring and the ERN
The research reviewed above provides converging evidence that
ACC is involved in some way in the evaluation of performance.
However, the relationship between the error-detection function
suggested by ERP data and the conflict monitoring function sup￾ported by fMRI studies remains a matter of debate. With regard to
this issue, Carter et al. (1998) and Botvinick et al. (2001) have
suggested that the conflict monitoring theory may be extended to
explain ERP data as well as fMRI findings. Carter et al. (1998)
noted that errors are particularly likely in conditions of response
conflict, and they offered this as an account of ACC activity on
error trials measured in electrophysiological recordings. Botvinick
et al. (2001) later refined this hypothesis. In their connectionist
model of conflict monitoring in the flanker task, the dynamics of
response activation and conflict were very different on correct and
error trials: Response conflict was larger on error trials than on
trials with correct responses, particularly in the period following
the response. Taking this finding of increased conflict following
errors in a model of human performance, together with fMRI
evidence that ACC is activated by conflict, Botvinick et al. sug￾gested that the ERN may be explained by the response conflict
monitoring theory.
The conflict monitoring theory thus promises to provide a
unified account of ERP and fMRI findings concerning the role of
ACC in performance monitoring. However, a number of objec￾tions have already been raised to the proposal that the ERN can be
explained in terms of response conflict. A first criticism runs as
follows: If the ERN reflects response conflict, then we should see
an analog of the ERN—that is, a negativity following the re￾sponse—on correct trials with high conflict. For example, one
might expect there to be a larger negativity following correct
responses on incongruent than congruent trials in the flanker task,
because there is greater conflict on incongruent trials. However,
such post-response negativities are typically not observed, and
hence it is concluded that the conflict account of the ERN must be
wrong (Pailing et al., 2000; Scheffers & Coles, 2000; Ullsperger &
von Cramon, 2001).
Findings reported by Scheffers and Coles (2000) seem similarly
difficult for the conflict theory to explain. These authors had partici￾pants perform the flanker task, but varied stimulus discriminability
such that there were an appreciable number of errors to congruent as
well as incongruent stimuli. When they measured the amplitude of the
ERN as a function of stimulus congruence, they found a larger ERN
following errors on congruent trials than on incongruent trials. Again,
this result seems problematic for the conflict theory: The obvious
expectation is that there should be more conflict, and hence a larger
ERN, on high-conflict incongruent trials.
933 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
One goal of the present research is to address these empirical
objections to the response conflict account of the ERN. Our
strategy is to use a detailed model of the dynamics of response
conflict in the flanker task to investigate how the conflict theory
might explain these apparently troubling findings. To look ahead
briefly, our simulation results demonstrate that, despite initial
appearances, each of the empirical observations described above is
entirely consistent with the conflict monitoring theory. Extending
this investigation, we show that monitoring for response conflict
could in principle provide a simple method for detecting errors.
This demonstration begins to address a further objection to the
conflict theory that is more theoretical in nature. That is, in seeking
to explain the ERN in terms of conflict monitoring rather than in
terms of an explicit error detection function, the conflict theory
appears to leave unanswered the question of how participants are
able to detect their errors (e.g., Rabbitt, 1966, 1968) and of why the
ERN correlates with many aspects of human error processing
(Falkenstein et al., 2000; Gehring et al., 1993). An aim of the
present research is to demonstrate that the conflict monitoring
theory can in fact provide answers to these questions. To this end,
we demonstrate that conflict monitoring may provide a computa￾tionally simple method for detecting response errors.
Research Overview
In the present research, we develop the response conflict ac￾count of the ERN outlined by Botvinick et al. (2001) and extend
this work to provide a new theory of how errors are detected in the
brain. The research is presented in three sections.
Section 1. We first take a connectionist model of conflict
monitoring in the flanker task previously developed in our labo￾ratory (Botvinick et al., 2001; Cohen & Servan-Schreiber, 1992)
and apply it to a range of ERN data. The aim is to demonstrate in
a formally explicit manner how the conflict monitoring theory can
explain the empirical phenomena of interest. We present five
simulations concerned with:
1. The dynamics of response conflict on correct and error
trials (Pailing et al., 2000; Scheffers & Coles, 2000;
Ullsperger & von Cramon, 2001).
2. The effect of stimulus congruence on the ERN (Scheffers
& Coles, 2000).
3. The impact of speed–accuracy instruction on the ERN
(Falkenstein et al., 1990; Gehring et al., 1993).
4. Stimulus frequency and the ERN (Holroyd & Coles,
2002).
5. The relationship between ERN amplitude and error force
(Gehring et al., 1993; Scheffers et al., 1996).
The first two simulations outline how the conflict monitoring
theory deals with the two apparently troubling empirical findings
described above. The third and fourth simulations demonstrate that
our theory can account for other findings that are typically inter￾preted in terms of the properties of the error-detection system. The
final simulation illustrates the utility of the model in providing
insights into possible causes of discrepant results (concerning the
ERN and error force).
Section 2. We next report the results of a new ERP experiment
designed to test predictions of the conflict monitoring theory that
arise from our simulations. To foreshadow the simulation results,
an insight provided by the modeling work is that the dynamics of
response selection and response conflict may be very different on
correct and error trials. Specifically, our model suggests that error
trials are characterized by response conflict in the period following
the response, whereas when conflict occurs on correct trials, it is
seen almost exclusively prior to the response. An implication of
this point is that previous researchers may have failed to find ERP
correlates of conflict monitoring on correct trials because they
looked in the wrong latency range: Conflict-related activity should
be observed prior to the response on correct trials, not in the
latency range of the ERN (cf. Pailing et al., 2000; Scheffers &
Coles, 2000; Ullsperger & von Cramon, 2001). We argue that the
N2 component of the ERP (e.g., Pritchard, Shappell, & Brandt,
1991) is the electrophysiological correlate of this pre-response
conflict on trials with correct responses. Section 2 presents an ERP
experiment that tests predictions about the timing and neural
source of the N2 that follow from this hypothesis.
Section 3. In the final section, we introduce a new theory of
how error detection is implemented in the brain, based on the
conflict monitoring theory. Although we propose that the ERN
reflects conflict monitoring rather than a process that directly
evaluates response accuracy, we do not intend to imply that the
ERN is unrelated to error processing. Instead, we argue that
conflict monitoring may provide a sufficient basis for detecting
errors: Given that the response conflict model replicates many
properties of the ERN, and that the ERN demonstrates many
properties expected of an error-detection system, it seemed plau￾sible to us that monitoring for response conflict might represent a
simple method for detecting errors. In Section 3 we demonstrate
that a conflict-based mechanism of error detection can perform
with a reliability comparable to that exhibited by human partici￾pants in previous empirical studies.
1. The Response Conflict Theory of the ERN
In this section, we use a connectionist model of conflict moni￾toring in the flanker task to demonstrate that our theory can explain
a variety of observed properties of the ERN. The use of a formal
model allows us to explore in a principled way the properties and
predictions of our theory. The benefits of this approach are two￾fold. First, the formal model makes explicit the structure and
assumptions of the theory, allowing a more rigorous check of its
internal consistency. Second, having a working model allows one
to demonstrate the implications of the theory that, because of the
complexities of the system described, may not be obvious on the
basis of one’s verbal theory or intuition alone. This property is
particularly important because it allows the model to generate
novel, testable predictions, and to suggest new explanations of
existing findings.
Given that our theory of the ERN is based on the dynamics of
response selection and response conflict, it is critical to have a
good model of these dynamics. Fortunately, ERN researchers have
typically used the flanker task described above, and the dynamics
of response selection are perhaps better understood in this task
934 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
than in any other, following the work of Eriksen and colleagues
(Coles et al., 1985; B. A. Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974; C. W. Eriksen
et al., 1985; Gehring, Gratton, Coles, & Donchin, 1992; Gratton,
Coles, & Donchin, 1992; Gratton et al., 1988). The empirical data
generated by this research have led to the development of a
computational model of response selection in this task that has
been successful in accounting for findings from behavioral exper￾iments (Cohen, Servan-Schreiber, & McClelland, 1992; Servan￾Schreiber, Bruno, Carter, & Cohen, 1998; Servan-Schreiber,
Carter, Bruno, & Cohen, 1998), ERP studies (Spencer & Coles,
1999), and fMRI studies (Botvinick et al., 2001). This model forms
the basis for the present simulations.
Model Details
Model structure. The model is illustrated in Figure 1 and is
described in more detail in the Appendix. It simulates performance
in a task requiring a key-press response indicating whether the
letter H or S appears in the center of a three-letter array, in which
the flanking letters may be congruent or incongruent with the
target letter. The basic model consists of three layers of units.
There is an input layer consisting of an array of six position￾specific letter units, a response layer with one unit for each
response, and an attention layer with units corresponding to each
location in the letter array. There are bidirectional excitatory
weights between layers (information flow) and inhibitory links
between all of the units within each layer (competition).
Botvinick et al. (2001) extended this model to implement the
conflict monitoring theory of ACC function, adding a unit that is
sensitive to the degree of conflict in the response layer. Conflict is
calculated as the energy (Hopfield, 1982) of the response layer:
Conflict   
i 1N  j 1N aiajwij,
where a denotes the activity of a unit, w the weight of the connection
between a pair of units, and the subscripts i and j are indexed over the
units of interest. In the present model, the units of interest are the two
response units, so the equation reduces to being the product of the
activations of these units, scaled by the strength of the inhibitory
connection between them. It is also important to note that each unit
only sends activation to other units when its own activation level is
positive, so that response conflict is effectively bounded at zero. Thus,
when one response unit is active and the other inhibited, conflict is
low or zero. However, when both units are active together, the product
of their activations (and hence the degree of conflict) is large—
capturing in a simple way the central notion of conflict. Thus, the
level of conflict in the model is not a parameter of the model that is
set by the experimenter. Rather, conflict is a measured property of the
model; it depends only on the relative activation levels of the com￾peting response units.
Although not crucial for the present purposes, Botvinick et al.
(2001) used simulated ACC activity to vary the allocation of
attention across trials. This feature of the model implements the
proposal that ACC forms part of a control loop that is responsible
for the flexible control of behavior and is not essential to the
results reported here.
Model dynamics. Inputs corresponding to the four possible
stimuli (the congruent stimuli, HHH and SSS; the incongruent
stimuli, HSH and SHS) are simulated as patterns of activity across
position-specific letter units of the model. When an input pattern is
applied to the letter units, activation flows through their connec￾Figure 1. Illustration of the model of the flanker task used in the present simulations. The input, attention, and
response layers are taken from the original model proposed by Cohen et al. (1992). The conflict monitoring
feedback loop was added by Botvinick et al. (2001) to simulate the role of ACC in performance monitoring and
adjustment of attentional control.
935 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
tions to the response units such that activation builds up in the
response layer. A biasing input from the attention layer favors the
letter in the center of the array, simulating the effect of visual
attention to the target. Over the course of a few processing cycles,
the network tends to settle into a state in which the target stimulus
dominates the input layer and the corresponding response is acti￾vated in the response layer. The number of cycles required for the
first response unit to reach a prespecified threshold is used to
simulate RTs in the model. Following Botvinick et al. (2001), we
calculate the simulated RT as:
RT ms  200   16 * cycles .
The 200 ms constant is used to account for processes that are not
part of the model. In particular, the model is intended to capture
properties of the central response selection process, not the early
perceptual processes that lead to stimulus identification. Spencer and
Coles (1999) have shown that the model accounts well for ERP
findings concerning response preparation in the flanker task, assum￾ing that a response threshold crossing in the model corresponds to the
onset of EMG activity. We follow this conclusion and, therefore,
attribute the 200 ms constant to perceptual processes.
To simulate processing variability, we added noise to each unit at
each time step (processing cycle). Because of this noise, the model
occasionally responds before the stimulus is fully processed, simulat￾ing the impulsive responses that are observed empirically in this task
(Cohen et al., 1992; Coles et al., 1985; Pailing et al., 2002). Impulsive
responding leads to occasional errors. Such errors are particularly
likely on incongruent trials because the flanking letters produce partial
activation of the incorrect response unit that, together with noise in the
system, push the activation of this unit above threshold. However,
even on error trials, continued processing of the stimulus following
the response, coupled with increasing attentional focus on the target
letter, may eventually lead to activation of the correct response unit. If
this activity is sufficient, the model will produce an error-correcting
response. As becomes apparent, this tendency of the model to auto￾matically correct its own errors provides the basis for our simulation
of the ERN.
Simulation details. The results of the simulations reported here
are based on 10 runs of 1,000 trials each, with randomized order￾ing of the stimuli. Except as noted, the parameters of the model are
those used by Botvinick et al. (2001) to model behavioral and
fMRI data. This is in line with our aim of investigating the
qualitative features of the conflict theory of the ERN, rather than
attempting to make detailed quantitative fits to specific data
through an exhaustive parameter search. Where the model was run
with different parameters to simulate the ERN in different exper￾imental conditions, the parameters were chosen so that the perfor￾mance of the model matched the relevant behavioral data. That is,
parameters were not chosen to fit the electrophysiological data.
Qualitatively similar patterns of results were found using a range
of parameter values, demonstrating that the simulation results
followed from the processing principles incorporated into the
model rather than the particular parameters used.
Simulation 1: Response Conflict on Correct and Error
Trials
The ERN is typically observed to begin around the time of error
responses, often slightly before, and to peak around 100 ms later
(see e.g., Coles et al., 1998; Falkenstein et al., 2000). The present
simulation is concerned with this basic finding. To this end, Figure
2 shows the dynamics of response activation and conflict in the
model on correct and error trials (averaging across congruent and
incongruent trials). As is evident from the top panels of Figure 2,
response conflict is larger and more sustained on error trials than
on correct response trials. Figure 3 plots the difference in conflict
between correct and error trials for the response-locked averages.
The difference in conflict emerges around the time of the response
and peaks 80 ms (five cycles) later. The post-error conflict signal
thus replicates the primary features of the ERN. Henceforth, we
refer to this difference in conflict between correct and error trials
in the period immediately following the response as the simulated
ERN.
Conflict on error trials. The simulated ERN can be explained
in terms of the activation patterns of the two response units, which
are given in the lower panels of Figure 2. As described above, the
model produces errors when noise causes the incorrect response
unit to cross threshold before the stimulus has been adequately
processed (see Figure 2, lower panels). However, continued pro￾cessing of the stimulus following the error causes the target stim￾ulus unit eventually to dominate the competition between units in
the input layer. As a consequence, activation of the correct re￾sponse unit increases following the error (see Figure 2, middle
panels). There is thus a brief period following incorrect responses
Figure 2. Activity in the network on correct and error trials of Simulation
1. Response conflict (simulated anterior cingulate cortex activity), upper
graphs, is the scaled product of the activity in the correct response unit
(middle graphs) and the incorrect response unit (lower graphs), bounded at
zero. Left panels show the activity in the model averaged across trials
aligned to stimulus onset. Right panels show corresponding response￾synchronized averages, where trials are aligned with the response.
936 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
during which both response units are activated, leading to a large
conflict signal.1
A different pattern of activity is observed on correct trials. On
these trials, activation of the correct response unit elicits the
response and continued processing of the stimulus after the re￾sponse simply reinforces the response decision made, with the
correct response unit increasingly activated and the incorrect re￾sponse unit becoming further inhibited (until external inputs to the
network are removed). Response conflict is therefore largely re￾stricted to the period prior to the response on correct trials, before
inhibition from the correct response unit totally suppresses incor￾rect response activity. Thus, conflict following the response is
observed only on error trials, and it is this post-error conflict that
we associate with the ERN.
In summary, we explain the ERN in terms of response conflict
that develops in the period following errors, a consequence of
continued processing of the stimulus that leads to post-error acti￾vation of the correct response and hence conflict with the incorrect
response just produced. A prediction of this hypothesis is that the
ERN should be closely related to error-correcting activity. Gehring
and Fencsik (1999) have reported empirical findings consistent
with this prediction, showing that the ERN coincides with periods
of coactivation of the correct and incorrect responses as measured
through electromyography (EMG). More recently, Rodrı´guez￾Fornells et al. (2002) have reported that the amplitude of the ERN
is larger on trials for which the error-correcting response occurs
quickly than on trials for which the error-correcting response is
delayed, again consistent with the present theory.2
Conflict on correct trials. The simulation results suggest that
conflict on correct trials is largely seen before the response. This
point is illustrated further in Figure 4, which replots the simulation
data separately for congruent and incongruent trials. For now, we
draw attention to the pattern of response conflict observed on
correct trials only (see Figure 4, upper middle panel, dotted lines).
The difference in conflict between congruent and incongruent
correct trials is largest in the period before the response, with little
or no difference in conflict apparent afterward in the latency range
of the ERN. Thus, the simulation results suggest that previous
criticisms of the conflict theory may be misplaced: The theory
does not predict that there should an analog of the ERN following
the response on high-conflict correct trials (cf. Pailing et al., 2000;
Scheffers & Coles, 2000; Ullsperger & von Cramon, 2001). In￾stead, the theory predicts that any negativity in the ERP associated
with such conflict should be observed before the response. As
discussed in detail below, we hypothesize that the N2 component
of the ERP is the electrophysiological correlate of this pre￾response conflict. This proposal forms the basis for the ERP
experiment described in Section 2.
Because the simulation data show essentially no conflict in the
period following correct responses, the model in its present form
cannot account for recent observations of negative potentials fol￾lowing correct responses, with timing similar to that of the ERN
(Vidal, Hasbroucq, Grapperon, & Bonnet, 2000). This may not be
surprising: Coles et al. (2001) have argued that these correct-trial
negativities may result from either evaluation of the timing of the
response (cf. Luu et al., 2000) or from artifacts from stimulus￾related negative components contaminating response-locked aver￾ages (cf. Vidal et al., 2000), neither of which is modeled in the
present simulations.
1 A salient feature of the response-locked data is the spike in conflict that
occurs at the time of error commission (see Figure 2, top right panel). This
spike is not observed in the stimulus-locked averages and can be under￾stood in terms of a selection bias introduced by the interaction between
noise variability in the simulations and the response-locking analysis
procedure. Response-locking entails that activity in the incorrect response
unit varies below threshold (by definition) at all points prior to error
commission and varies above threshold (by definition) at the time of the
incorrect response. Thus, activity in the incorrect response unit is always
higher at the time of the response than on immediately preceding process￾ing cycles, and hence, response conflict increases sharply at this point.
Moreover, on processing cycles immediately following error commission,
the high degree of activation of the incorrect response unit causes, via
lateral inhibition, a temporary reduction in the activity of the correct
response unit. As a consequence, conflict is reduced in the period imme￾diately following the error.
2 Coles et al. (2001) have reported findings relating the ERN to EMG
activity that initially appear to present a challenge to our theory. They
computed a measure of response conflict by multiplying together the
maximum EMG activity of the two response hands, then selected subsets
of correct and error trials that were matched according to this measure of
conflict (Scheffers, 1999). Critically, even though the trials were matched
for conflict in this way, ERN amplitude was greater on error trials than on
correct trials, apparently challenging the present hypothesis. However, the
method for calculating conflict used by Coles et al. may not be ideal. In
particular, whereas response conflict is defined as the simultaneous acti￾vation of competing responses, Coles et al. estimated conflict by multiply￾ing together two measures (maxima of EMG activity in the two response
hands) that occur asynchronously. Moreover, in estimating conflict on the
basis of peaks of EMG activity across entire trial epochs, their method does
not specifically match for conflict in the post-response period that our
theory associates with the ERN. Therefore, Coles et al.’s analysis method
may not accurately match trials for the degree of conflict at the latency of
the ERN. A reanalysis of the data from Simulation 1 produced results
consistent with this interpretation. We followed Coles et al.’s procedure,
selecting correct and error trials that were matched according to the product
of activation maxima of the two response units. Although matched in this
way, post-response conflict—the simulated ERN—was substantially larger
following errors than following correct responses. These simulation results
are consistent with the empirical findings and lead to a refinement of the
prediction tested by Coles et al.: Our theory predicts that there should be
no difference in ERN amplitude for correct and error trials that are matched
for conflict in the post-response period when conflict is measured as the
product of synchronous EMG activations.
Figure 3. Difference in response conflict between correct and error trials
of Simulation 1. The increased conflict on error trials in the period
following the response (at time 0 ms) is the simulation of the error-related
negativity.
937 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Simulation 2: ERN and Stimulus Congruence
The results of our second simulation demonstrate further the
ability of the conflict monitoring theory to explain findings that
initially appear troubling. The finding of interest is Scheffers and
Coles’s (2000) report of a larger ERN following errors to congru￾ent stimuli than following errors to incongruent stimuli. At first
glance, the conflict theory would appear to predict the opposite,
because one might expect there to be greater post-error conflict,
and hence a greater ERN, on high-conflict incongruent trials.
However, a detailed simulation of the dynamics of response con￾flict on congruent and incongruent trials shows that the conflict
theory in fact makes the opposite prediction, as shown in Figure 4.
The top panel shows the simulated ERN—the difference in con￾flict between error trials and correct trials, shown in the upper
middle panel—and the lower panels show activity in the correct
and incorrect response units. An immediately striking feature of
the simulation results is that post-error conflict is larger on con￾gruent trials than on incongruent trials. That is, the simulated ERN
is larger on congruent trials than on incongruent trials, with no
difference in peak latency, consistent with the empirical findings
of Scheffers and Coles (2000).
As described above, the simulated ERN is the result of post￾error conflict between the incorrect response unit (that just led to
the error response) and the correct response unit (that becomes
activated because of continued stimulus processing). A crucial
determinant of the amplitude of the simulated ERN is therefore the
rate at which activation builds up in the correct response unit
following the error. As is evident from the lower middle panel of
Figure 4, there is more activation of the correct response unit on
congruent error trials than on incongruent error trials—a straight￾forward consequence of the unambiguous nature of congruent
stimuli. The result is a greater ERN on congruent trials. (It will be
noticed also that activity in the incorrect response unit falls more
quickly following the response on congruent trials than on incon￾gruent trials. This lower level of post-response activity on congru￾ent trials would tend to reduce the conflict signal. However, the
reduction is proportionately smaller than the corresponding in￾crease in post-response activity in the correct response unit.)
A further analysis of the simulation results demonstrates that the
conflict theory can explain other aspects of Scheffers and Coles’s
(2000) results that initially seem troubling. In particular, Scheffers
and Coles computed ERN amplitude for trials on which only one
response was activated (as measured through EMG recordings). It
seems that our theory might have difficulty in explaining why an
ERN was observed at all on these trials, because only one response
was activated. To address this issue, Figure 5 presents simulated
ERN amplitude following congruent and incongruent stimuli for
two sets of trials. The left-hand bars show the results for all trials
(i.e., summarizing the results of Figure 4). The right-hand bars
show the results for error trials on which correct response unit
activation remained subthreshold throughout the trial. Evidently,
for both congruent and incongruent conditions, a significant sim￾ulated ERN was observed even for trials in which error-correcting
activity remained subthreshold. On these trials, the simulated ERN
reflects conflict between the initial error and error-correcting ac￾tivity that remains below the threshold for generating an overt
response (as would be measured through EMG).
Simulation 3: ERN and Speed–Accuracy Instruction
Gehring et al. (1993) reported that the amplitude of the ERN is
increased when accuracy is emphasized over speed, a result con￾Figure 4. Results of Simulation 2, showing response-locked behavior of
the model on congruent and incongruent trials, separately for correct and
error responses. The top panel shows the simulated error-related negativity
(ERN), calculated as the difference in conflict between the correct and
error trials of each condition (shown in the panel below). The lower panels
show activity in the correct and incorrect response units, from which the
conflict measure is calculated. The vertical dotted line indicates the time of
the response (labeled R). Cong  congruent; Incong  incongruent;
Corr  correct trials; Err  error trials.
Figure 5. The amplitude of the simulated error-related negativity (ERN)
on congruent and incongruent trials of Simulation 2. The results are shown
for the average of all trials (left bars) and for the subset of trials in which
activation of the correct response remained subthreshold throughout the
trial (right bars).
938 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
firmed independently by Falkenstein and colleagues (Falkenstein
et al., 1990, 2000). Gehring et al. accounted for their finding by
proposing that errors are more salient to participants striving for
accuracy than to participants for whom speed is the primary
concern. That is, they explained their findings in terms of changes
to the monitoring system—its sensitivity to the salience of errors—
across conditions. It may not be initially obvious why a response
conflict signal should be similarly sensitive to changes in accuracy
instruction. However, a detailed simulation of Gehring et al.’s
experiment not only demonstrates that the conflict monitoring
theory can explain the empirical results, but also shows that our
theory can provide a new explanation of these findings.
To model the results, we assumed that speed–accuracy instruc￾tions have two effects on the way participants perform the task.
Specifically, participants striving for accuracy will adopt a more
strict response criterion and will focus attention more strongly on
the target letter to prevent errors on incongruent trials. Three
speed–accuracy conditions were simulated. In the neutral condi￾tion, we used the parameters described in Simulation 1. An accu￾racy condition was modeled by increasing the threshold on the
response units (from 0.18 to 0.20) and increasing the external input
to the center attention unit (by a factor of 1.5). A speed condition
was modeled by reducing the threshold on the response units (to
0.16) and reducing the external input to the center attention unit
(by a factor of 0.75). With these parameters, error rates in the
neutral condition were twice as large as in the accuracy condition,
and in the speed condition they were three times as large, matching
the behavioral results of Gehring et al.’s (1993) experiment. By
this choice of parameters, we do not imply that it is not necessary
to pay attention to the central target when performing under
speeded task conditions. Our point is simply that attention to the
central target is more necessary under conditions in which accu￾racy is stressed; under speeded conditions, a less focused atten￾tional state can be beneficial because it allows participants to use
flanker information and thereby reduce RTs on congruent trials.
The simulation results are shown in Figure 6. Consistent with
the empirical findings of Gehring et al. (1993), the simulated ERN
varied as a function of speed–accuracy condition, increasing in
amplitude with more accurate performance. Despite changes in
amplitude, the time at which the simulated ERN reached its peak
did not vary across conditions, again consistent with empirical
data. The difference in simulated ERN amplitude across conditions
results from differences in post-error activation of the correct
response unit (see Figure 6, third panel): Error-correcting activity
is strongest in the accuracy condition, intermediate in the neutral
condition, and weakest in the speed condition. These differences in
post-error activity in the correct response channel are the direct
result of the parameters that implement the changes in speed–
accuracy condition: Greater attentional focus in the accuracy con￾dition leads to more rapid post-error build-up of activity in the
correct response unit and, hence, a larger simulated ERN.
In this way, the response conflict model simulates empirically
observed properties of the ERN, while suggesting a different set of
mechanisms by which these properties arise. Specifically, the
simulation results suggest that processing changes required to
increase accuracy may directly and necessarily lead to an increased
ERN. The model does not require an additional assumption that the
ERN is modulated by the salience of errors to the participant.
Simulation 4: ERN and Stimulus Frequency
Holroyd and Coles (2002; Holroyd, Praamstra, Plat, & Coles,
2002) have studied the ERN in a modified version of the flanker
task. Participants were presented with letter strings (HHHHH,
SSHSS, SSSSS, and HHSHH), but stimuli with one target letter
(e.g., H) were presented on 80% of trials, whereas stimuli with the
other target letter (S) were presented on only 20% of trials. They
labeled the highly probable target the frequent (F), and the less
probable target the infrequent (I). The two letters were presented
equally often as flankers. There were thus four conditions, infre￾quent congruent (III, 10% of trials), infrequent incongruent (FIF,
10% of trials), frequent incongruent (IFI, 40% of trials), and
frequent congruent (FFF, 40% of trials). The participants were
sensitive to the frequency manipulation, responding more quickly
and accurately to frequent targets than to infrequent ones. There
were too few errors to measure the ERN on frequent congruent
trials (FFF), but otherwise ERN amplitude was found to vary
across conditions: It was largest on frequent incongruent trials
(IFI), intermediate on infrequent congruent trials (III), and smallest
on infrequent incongruent trials (FIF).
Holroyd and Coles (2002) explained their findings in terms of
their theory that the ERN is a signal indicating that the conse￾quences of an action are worse than expected. In the case of
infrequent incongruent trials, for example, participants made errors
on nearly 70% of the trials. Holroyd and Coles suggest that
Figure 6. Results of Simulation 3, showing response-locked averages of
network behavior separately for the accuracy, neutral, and speed instruc￾tion conditions. The top panel shows the simulated error-related negativity
(ERN), calculated as the difference in conflict between the correct and
error trials of each condition (shown in the panel below). The lower panels
show activity in the correct and incorrect response units, from which the
conflict measure is calculated. The vertical dotted line indicates the time of
the response (labeled R). Corr  correct trials; Err  error trials.
939 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
participants therefore expected to make errors in this condition,
and hence, a small ERN was observed when they actually did so.
In contrast, participants made errors on less than 5% of trials in the
frequent incongruent condition (IFI). They therefore expected to
be correct on these trials. When they were not, and hence the
outcome was worse than expected, a large ERN was observed.
Holroyd and Coles (2002) therefore proposed that the error￾monitoring system is sensitive to whether or not errors are pre￾dicted. The present model does not include any mechanism for
predicting errors, yet a detailed simulation of response conflict in
Holroyd and Coles’s experiment demonstrates that our theory can
explain their findings. To simulate the experimental results, we
assumed that participants are sensitive to the relative probabilities
of both stimuli and responses. In the experiment, one stimulus
letter appeared in the target location four times as frequently as the
other letter, and hence, one response was made at least four times
as often as the other. We simulated the effects on processing of
these differences in stimulus and response probabilities by increas￾ing the gain of the stimulus unit coding the frequent target stimulus
(by a factor of 1.5) and increasing the gain of the response unit
coding the frequent response (by a factor of 1.2), with parameter
values chosen so that the error rates in the model matched those
found empirically by Holroyd and Coles. Thus, the model had a
bias toward coding the target stimulus as the more frequent letter
and a bias toward producing the more frequent response.
The results of the simulation are shown in Figure 7. The simu￾lated ERN (see Figure 7 top panel) captures the pattern of the
empirical data reported by Holroyd and Coles (2002): It is largest
following errors on frequent incongruent (IFI) trials, intermediate
on infrequent congruent trials (III), and lowest in the infrequent
incongruent condition (FIF). As is evident from the lower middle
panel of Figure 7, post-error activation of the correct response unit
occurred most rapidly and most strongly in the frequent incongru￾ent condition and was greatly reduced following errors to infre￾quent targets. This result is a straightforward consequence of the
bias toward the frequent response used in the simulation. Thus, as
in the previous simulations, the amplitude of the simulated ERN
varied across conditions depending on how strongly the correct
response unit competed with the activation of the incorrect re￾sponse unit following the error.
Figure 8 plots simulated ERN amplitude as a function of response
accuracy across conditions, contrasted with the empirical data ob￾tained by Holroyd and Coles (2002; cf. their Figure 10). Although the
model somewhat underestimates the ERN observed in the infrequent
incongruent condition, the overall quantitative fit is good given that
few parameter changes were made from the original model. As in the
previous simulation, differences in simulated ERN amplitude across
conditions are a direct consequence of changes in the dynamics of
task processing according to task demands.
Simulation 5: ERN and Error Force
As mentioned briefly in the Introduction, attempts to relate ERN
amplitude to the force with which errors are committed have
produced seemingly contradictory results. Gehring et al. (1993)
reported a negative correlation between these measures, with
larger ERNs associated with smaller error force. By contrast,
Scheffers et al. (1996) found the opposite pattern, with a larger
ERN for motor (squeeze) errors than on trials with incorrect EMG
activation but no overt error activity. There were many differences
between the methods of Gehring et al. and Scheffers et al., includ￾ing the experimental task used. However, of particular interest here
are the differing rates of error correction observed in the two
experiments. Gehring et al., using the flanker task, reported that
roughly 70% of errors were corrected by their participants. Schef￾fers et al. used a hybrid choice–RT/go–nogo task. Participants
responded to the direction of an arrow stimulus but were required
to withhold responding on some trials depending on the orientation
of a frame surrounding the arrow. Thus, participants could make
“errors of action,” responding on nogo trials—errors that could not
be corrected with a further response. Participants could also re￾spond with the wrong hand on go trials. It is these “errors of
choice” that we are interested in here, and all such errors were
corrected in their experiment.
The response conflict model predicts a very close relationship
between the ERN and error correction. We therefore investigated
whether the discrepant results of Gehring et al. (1993) and Schef￾fers et al. (1996) might be explained by the differing rates of error
correction observed in their experiments. We defined error correc￾tion in the model as occurring when a threshold crossing in the
incorrect response unit was followed by threshold crossing in the
correct response unit. In Simulation 1, 63% of errors were cor￾rected in this way, so the results of this simulation were taken as
a reasonable model of the results of Gehring et al. To simulate the
Figure 7. Response-synchronized averages for the frequent incongruent,
infrequent congruent, and infrequent incongruent conditions of Simulation
4. The simulated error-related negativity (ERN), shown in the top panel, is
derived from the conflict signals on correct and error trials that are given
in the panel below. The lower panels show activity in the correct and
incorrect response units. The vertical dotted line indicates the time of the
response (labeled R). Freq Inc  frequent incongruent trials; Infreq Con 
infrequent congruent trials; Infreq Inc  infrequent incongruent trials;
Corr  correct trials; Err  error trials.
940 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
results of Scheffers et al., we required parameters for which all
errors would be corrected. This was achieved by increasing the
external input to the center attention unit (by a factor of 1.25) and
reducing the strength of the mutual inhibition between the two
response units (from –3.0 to –1.5). This choice of parameters
makes the general point that error-correction rates will vary as a
function of at least two factors: the degree to which attention is
effectively allocated to target information and the degree to which
participants commit to their first response (captured by the level of
inhibition between the two responses).
For each simulation, error trials were divided into four quartiles
according to ERN amplitude. The error force on each trial was
taken as the maximum activation in the incorrect response unit,
and mean error force was calculated separately for each ERN
quartile. The results are shown in Figure 9. The simulation with
63% of errors corrected replicates Gehring et al.’s (1993) finding
of a negative correlation between ERN amplitude and error force,
with ERN amplitude reduced on trials with strong activation of the
incorrect response. The explanation for this finding is that trials
with high error activity tend to be those on which the error is not
subsequently corrected: The greater the activity in the incorrect
response unit, the less likely it is that the correct response unit will
overcome lateral inhibition and correct the error. Thus, trials with
high error activation have little post-error activity in the correct
response unit and hence little conflict. The result is a negative
correlation between simulated ERN size and error force. By con￾trast, under simulation conditions in which all errors were cor￾rected, a positive correlation between simulated ERN amplitude
and error force is observed, replicating Scheffers et al.’s (1996)
findings. In this case, post-error activation of the correct response
unit occurs on every trial (because all errors are corrected). The
primary determinant of ERN amplitude is therefore the degree of
activation of the incorrect response unit: the greater the activation,
the larger the conflict signal, and hence the positive correlation
between error force and ERN amplitude.
The model is therefore able to explain apparently discrepant
findings concerning ERN amplitude and error force and makes the
general prediction that factors affecting the rate of error correction
should influence the relationship between ERN amplitude and
error force. Once again, our explanation of the empirical findings
is in terms of the parameters in the processing mechanisms re￾sponsible for task performance, rather than the properties of a
mechanism dedicated to error detection.
Discussion of Simulation Results
The conflict monitoring theory has previously been used to
explain ACC activity observed in PET and fMRI studies. The aim
of our simulations was to provide a formal investigation of the
ability of this theory to explain observed properties of the ERN, a
brain potential thought to be generated in ACC. According to our
hypothesis, the ERN reflects conflict that develops in the period
following errors. The simulation results demonstrate that this hy￾pothesis can explain the timing of the ERN and its sensitivity to
stimulus congruence, speed–accuracy instruction, stimulus fre￾quency, and error force.
The simulation results first provided insight into the way in
which our theory can explain findings that initially appear chal￾lenging. Simulation 1 showed that response conflict should be
restricted to the period prior to the response on trials with correct
responses, explaining why correlates of conflict monitoring are not
observed after the response on correct trials (cf. Pailing et al.,
2000; Scheffers & Coles, 2000; Ullsperger & von Cramon, 2001).
Simulation 2 showed that conflict may be higher following errors
on congruent trials than on incongruent trials because post-error
activation of the correct response, and hence post-error conflict, is
larger on congruent trials (cf. Scheffers & Coles, 2000).
The simulations also demonstrated that the conflict monitoring
theory can offer alternative explanations of results that have pre￾viously been interpreted in terms of properties of the error￾detection system. Thus, Gehring et al. (1993) explained their
finding that ERN amplitude increases with response accuracy by
proposing that “the ERN is associated with an error-related pro￾Figure 8. Error-related negativity (ERN) amplitude as a function of
response accuracy across the stimulus conditions of Simulation 4. The
results are shown alongside the empirical data from Holroyd and Coles
(2002). The simulated ERN was fit to the data by multiplying the peak
value of the simulated ERN (at Cycle 5 post-response) by 190. IFI 
frequent incongruent trials; III  infrequent congruent trials; FIF  infre￾quent incongruent trials; data  empirical results; sim  simulation results.
Figure 9. Results of Simulation 5, showing the error force associated
with each error-related negativity (ERN) quartile as a function of the
percentage of errors that were corrected. Max act.  maximum activation.
941 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
cessing system, whose activity is modulated by the degree to
which accuracy is important to the subject” (p. 387). Meanwhile,
Holroyd and Coles (2002) explained their finding of reduced ERN
amplitude following errors to infrequent stimuli in terms of the
sensitivity of the error-processing system to the expectedness of
errors. By contrast, we explain both of these findings in terms of
changes in task processing engendered by the task context. In
Simulation 3, for example, we assumed that participants striving
for accuracy would attempt to focus their attention more effec￾tively on the central target letter. In the model, post-error activa￾tion of the correct response unit was increased as a consequence of
increased attention, resulting in a high level of post-error conflict
and a large simulated ERN. Of course, it may be possible to adapt
existing theories to incorporate the idea that changes in task
processing directly affect performance monitoring. Nonetheless,
this possibility does not detract from the value of the present work
in suggesting this novel account of the empirical data.
The final simulation demonstrated that the conflict monitoring
theory can provide insight into the cause of apparently discrepant
empirical findings. Gehring et al. (1993) found that ERN amplitude
was negatively correlated with error force, leading them to suggest
that the ERN reflects participants’ attempts to “brake” the erroneous
response—that is, they linked the ERN to mechanisms of error com￾pensation. In contrast, Scheffers et al. (1996) found that ERN ampli￾tude increased with error force, suggesting to them that the ERN
relates to the magnitude of the error—that is, they linked the ERN to
error detection. Our simulations offer a unified account of these
findings, explaining the discrepant results in terms of the differing rate
of error correction observed in the two experiments.
Overall, therefore, our model of conflict monitoring in the
flanker task was able to simulate a range of empirically observed
properties of the ERN, a formal demonstration that the conflict
monitoring theory can explain these properties. The simulations
were run without adjustments to the parameters associated with the
monitoring process, reflecting the power of this simple mechanism
to account for a wide range of empirical data. Furthermore, fits to
empirical ERP data were achieved without reparameterization of
the model for each simulation, evidence of the robustness of the
results obtained. Nevertheless, an important goal for future re￾search will be to refine the model in order to provide detailed
quantitative comparisons with empirical data (and with competing
theories when they are specified in comparable detail). However,
perhaps the most stringent test of any model is its ability to
generate testable predictions. In the next section we test one such
prediction of the model, concerning ERP correlates of conflict
monitoring on trials with correct responses.
2. ERP Correlates of Conflict on Correct and Error Trials
The simulation results suggest that response conflict should be
limited to the period before the response on trials with correct
responses. The simulation results therefore lead to the novel pre￾diction that we should be able to measure conflict-related ERPs
prior to the response on these trials. In fact, a good candidate for
this conflict-related ERP, the N2, is already widely studied. In the
flanker task, the N2 emerges around 250 ms after the presentation
of the stimulus, has a frontocentral scalp topography, and is larger
on incongruent trials than congruent trials (Heil, Osman,
Wiegelmann, Rolke, & Henninghausen, 2000; Kopp, Rist, & Mat￾tler, 1996; Liotti, Woldorff, Perez, & Mayberg, 2000). Kopp et al.
(1996) have shown that N2 amplitude increases with the degree of
activation of the incorrect response, as measured through EMG.
Moreover, Liotti et al. (2000), using the Stroop task, localized the
N2 component to ACC (see also Lange, Wijers, Mulder, & Mul￾der, 1998). The N2 therefore has all of the properties expected of
a conflict-related ERP. However, none of the existing studies of
the N2 observed in the flanker task have compared this component
directly with the ERN, nor have they assessed the timing of the N2
with regard to the response. These questions are addressed in the
present experiment.
The predictions tested in the experiment are as follows:
1. The N2 should be similar to the ERN in terms of scalp
topography and neural source.
2. The N2 and ERN should differ in latency: The N2 should
precede the response, whereas the ERN should follow it.
The first prediction is a straightforward implication of the theory
that the ERN and N2 are both correlates of response conflict
monitoring in ACC. The second prediction follows from our
simulation results suggesting that conflict on correct trials should
be limited to the period before the response, whereas error trials
are characterized by post-response conflict.
Method
Participants. Nine female and 7 male undergraduate students from
Princeton University (Princeton, NJ) participated in a single 2-hr session
for course credit. All were right-handed and between 18 and 23 years old,
and all had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Informed consent was
obtained from each participant at the start of the session.
Procedure. The participants were seated in front of a screen in a dimly
lit room. They performed a version of the flanker task in which they
responded by key-press to indicate the direction of a central arrow that was
surrounded by flanker arrows. There were four stimuli, the congruent
stimuli  and  and the incongruent stimuli   
and   . The four stimuli were presented in pseudo-random order
with the constraint that each stimulus appeared equally often in each block.
On each trial, the participant was first presented with a fixation cross in the
center of the screen. The cross was replaced after 500 ms with an imper￾ative stimulus. The stimulus was presented for 100 ms and then the screen
was cleared, remaining clear until 500 ms after the participant’s response.
At this time the string “- -” appeared to mark the intertrial interval, the
duration of which varied randomly from 1,000 to 1,100 ms. All stimuli
were presented in white on a black background. At a viewing distance of
roughly 110 cm, the arrow stimuli each subtended 0.4° of visual angle
vertically and 0.6° horizontally, and they were spaced 0.3° apart.
Participants first performed 2 or 3 practice blocks of 36 trials each. They
then performed 12 blocks of 68 trials each during which behavioral and
ERP data were collected. The participants were allowed to rest between
blocks, at which time they were given feedback showing their mean correct
RT and error rate in the previous block and for the whole session. If their
error rate fell below 8%, they were encouraged to respond more quickly. If
they made greater than 16% errors, they were told to respond more
carefully. Participants were also encouraged through verbal instruction to
sit in a relaxed position, to minimize eye movement, and to blink as seldom
as possible while they performed the task.
Recording. The electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded with Ag–
AgCl electrodes from 64 locations arranged an extended 10–20 system
montage in a fabric cap (Neurosoft, El Paso, TX), referenced to linked
mastoids. The electrooculogram (EOG) was recorded from electrodes
942 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
placed above and below the left eye and to the sides of each eye to monitor
eye movements. The ground electrode was placed on the chin. The elec￾trode impedance for all electrodes was less than 50 k . The EEG and EOG
signals were amplified (Sensorium model EPA-6, Charlotte, VT; input
impedance  1 G ) by a gain of 20,000 with a 12-bit processor, filtered
through a pass-band of 0.1–300 Hz (half-amplitude cutoff). The signals
were digitized at 250 Hz.3
Data analysis. Stimulus- and response-synchronized epochs were ex￾tracted from the EEG off-line. Trials with blinks, large eye movements,
instrument artifacts or amplifier saturation were rejected off-line through
manual editing. For the ERN, we computed response-locked average
waveforms for correct and error trials in an epoch beginning 200 ms prior
to key-press and lasting 700 ms. The baseline window ran from –100 ms
to 0 ms relative to the response. For the N2, we analyzed data only for trials
with correct responses, computing stimulus-locked averages for congruent
and incongruent trials separately. The epoch ran for 800 ms, beginning 200
ms prior to stimulus onset, with a 100 ms pre-stimulus baseline.
To compare the timing of conflict- and error-related ERP components,
we extracted a second set of response-synchronized epochs from the EEG.
These epochs ran from 800 ms prior to the response until 200 ms after, with
the baseline period from 800 to 700 ms before the response. Response￾locked waveforms were computed separately for correct congruent, correct
incongruent, and error trials.
Component scalp topographies were analyzed using an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) comparing voltage across 15 electrode sites (chosen to cover
midline scalp areas known from previous studies to be the focus of the ERN
and N2). Degrees of freedom were corrected using Greenhouse–Geisser ep￾silon values. Data from all 64 electrodes were then used in computing the most
likely dipole source of each component. Dipole models were computed sep￾arately for the ERN difference wave (error – correct) and the N2 difference
wave (incongruent – congruent).4 Modeling was performed on unfiltered data,
rereferenced to the average reference, across a 24-ms window around the
component peak. The reported dipole solutions were stable across different
seeding locations and were stable to the addition of further dipoles to the
solution model. The validity of the dipole solutions was further assessed by
applying them to the error grandaverage and incongruent correct grandaverage
waveforms. These waveforms were first digitally high-pass filtered ( 2 Hz) to
remove the effects of slow parietal positivities seen around the time of the
response. Fits to the resulting waveforms were comparable to those reported
for the difference waveforms.
Results
Behavioral data. Mean correct RT was greater on incongruent
trials than on congruent trials, averaging 421 ms and 352 ms,
respectively, a reliable difference, t(15)  10.2, p  .01. Error
rates were also higher for incongruent stimuli (18.7%) than for
congruent stimuli (2.1%), again a reliable difference, t(15)  10.5,
p  .01. Mean RT was higher on correct trials (386 ms) than on
error trials (313 ms), t(15)  9.88, p  .01. These findings are
consistent with those of previous studies using the flanker task
(e.g., Coles et al., 1985; B. A. Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974; C. W.
Eriksen et al., 1985).
The ERN and N2. The upper panel of Figure 10 plots
response-synchronized grandaverage waveforms for correct and
error trials at electrode location FCz. An ERN is clearly evident as
a negative deflection in the waveform on error trials that emerged
just prior to the response and peaked 56 ms later. The ERN was
followed by a large sustained positivity over posterior scalp re￾gions, the error positivity (Pe; Falkenstein et al., 1995; Falkenstein
et al., 2000). The lower panel of Figure 10 shows the scalp
topography of the correct and error trial waveforms, along with the
difference wave, at the time of peak ERN amplitude (56 ms after
the response). A midline frontocentral topography is clear for error
trials and for the difference wave.
To quantify the ERN, we performed a three-way repeated mea￾sures ANOVA using the average voltage in the 100 ms following
the response. The factors were response accuracy (correct, error),
anterior-posterior electrode location (F, FC, C, CP, P), and later￾ality (3, z, 4). A reliable main effect of response accuracy indicated
that the waveform on error trials was more negative than that seen
on correct trials, F(1, 15)  35.6, MSE  99.3, p  .01. That is,
a robust ERN was observed. The ERN was largest at FCz and
reduced in amplitude for electrodes away from this site, resulting
in reliable interactions between response accuracy and anterior￾posterior location, F(4, 60)  22.5, MSE  4.0,   0.45, p  .01,
and between accuracy and laterality, F(2, 30)  14.6, MSE  4.0,


0.94, p  .01, and a reliable three-way interaction, F(8,
120)  4.4, MSE  0.4,   0.51, p  .01. Taking the amplitude
difference between correct and error trials as a measure of the
ERN, pairwise comparisons revealed that the ERN was reliably
larger at FCz than at the other electrode sites (all ps  .01).
The upper panel of Figure 11 plots stimulus-locked grandaver￾age waveforms for correct congruent and correct incongruent trials
at electrode site FCz. An enhanced N2 was evident on incongruent
trials. The difference between congruent and incongruent trial
waveforms peaked 344 ms after stimulus onset. The lower panel of
Figure 11 shows the scalp topography at this time for congruent
trials, incongruent trials, and the difference between these condi￾tions. A midline frontocentral topography is apparent for incon￾gruent trials and for the difference wave. A smaller and more
frontal negativity was present on congruent trials.
A three-way repeated measures ANOVA was performed us￾ing the average amplitude of the waveforms in a window
running from 300 to 400 ms after stimulus onset. The factors
were stimulus congruence (congruent, incongruent), anterior￾posterior electrode location, and laterality. N2 amplitude was
greater for incongruent trials than for congruent trials, F(1,
15)  25.19, MSE  57.6, p  .01. The amplitude of the
congruence effect was largest at site FCz, indicated by reliable
interactions between congruence and anterior-posterior loca￾tion, F(4, 60)  5.3, MSE  1.34,   0.39, p  .05, and
between congruence and laterality, F(2, 30)  9.2, MSE  0.7,


0.96, p  .01, although the three-way interaction did not
reach significance, F(8, 120)  1.6, p  .1. Using the amplitude
3 The use of a high cutoff frequency (300 Hz) raises the possibility that
aliasing of high-frequency signals contributed to our results. However, in
system tests we found that signals above 30 Hz simply consisted of noise
that was orders of magnitude weaker than the low-frequency signals of
interest in the present research, suggesting that the effects of aliasing of
high-frequency activity were negligible.
4 Dipoles were fit using EMSE v4.2 (Source Signal Imaging, San Diego,
CA) with a three-shell sphere model. Using the method described in
Greenblatt and Robinson (1994), the algorithm used a three-shell sphere for
each electrode to correct for nonspherical head shapes. The conductivity
ratios for the sphere model were scalp:skull:brain  1:0.0125:1 (Rush and
Driscoll, 1968). The dipole fitting algorithm minimizes a chi-square cost
function, using the iterative Nelder–Mead simplex algorithm (Press, Flan￾nery, Teukolsky, & Vetterling, 1992) for the nonlinear components, with a
minimum norm pseudoinverse solution for the linear components at each
step.
943 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
difference between congruent and incongruent trials to measure
the effect of response conflict, pairwise comparisons revealed
that the effect of congruence was larger at FCz than at other
electrode sites (although only marginally so at Cz, p  .06; p 
.01 at all other electrodes).
Thus, both the ERN and N2 are clear in the data. We now turn
to direct comparisons between these components. Our first predic￾tion is that the ERN and N2 should share a similar topography and
neural source. Our second prediction is that the N2 should precede
the response whereas the ERN should follow it.
Figure 10. The error-related negativity (ERN). Top: Response-synchronized waveforms for correct and error
trials at FCz in an epoch running from 200 ms before until 500 ms after the response. The ordinate indicates the
time of the response. Bottom: Scalp voltage maps at the time of the peak of the ERN (56 ms after the response),
separately for correct trials, error trials, and the difference between these conditions.
Figure 11. The N2. Top: Stimulus-locked waveforms for correct trials, separately for congruent and incon￾gruent stimuli. Data are shown for electrode FCz, in an epoch running from 200 ms before until 600 ms after
the stimulus. Bottom: Scalp topography for congruent and incongruent trials, and the difference between these
conditions observed 344 ms after stimulus presentation. The scalp topography data for congruent and incon￾gruent trials were high-pass filtered above 2 Hz to remove the contribution of slow parietal positivities that
otherwise mask the effects of interest. Incong  incongruent; Cong  congruent.
944 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Comparison of scalp topography and neural source. As de￾scribed above, and as shown in Figures 10 and 11, the ERN and N2
share a similar scalp topography with peak amplitude at FCz. To
compare the topographies more directly, we first scaled the data so
that the ERN and N2 were equated for amplitude (McCarthy &
Wood, 1985). To this end, we calculated the best fitting regression
line between voltage amplitude for the ERN and N2 difference
waves across electrodes. This analysis indicated that there was a
high degree of similarity in topography between the two compo￾nents, r(63)  .80, p  .01, and that ERN amplitude was 1.9 times
as large as N2 amplitude. This value was used to equate the
amplitude of the N2 and ERN when comparing their scalp
distributions.
An ANOVA performed on the scaled data revealed that the N2
had a slightly more posterior and right-lateralized topography than
the ERN, reflected in significant interactions between component
and anterior-posterior location, F(4, 60)  11.9, MSE  4.0,  
0.41, p  .01, and between component and laterality, F(2, 30) 
4.97, MSE  3.95,   0.90, p  .05, although the three-way
interaction was not reliable, F(8, 120)  1.84, p  .1. Inspection
of the scalp voltage maps (Figures 10 and 11), however, indicated
that these topography differences were not consistent across con￾ditions. In particular, the N2 observed on incongruent trials
showed no evidence of a focus lying posterior to FCz, and little
evidence of right-lateralization. Indeed, a comparison of the ERN
and the incongruent trial N2, r(63)  .93, p  .01, scaling factor 
2.3, revealed a marginally reliable trend for a more frontal focus
for the N2 compared with the ERN, F(4, 60)  2.79, MSE  3.27,


0.35, p  .1.
A general problem when comparing scalp topographies across
conditions is that any given voltage distribution is likely to be the
result of many overlapping components, each reflecting the activ￾ity of a different neural source (Coles, Gratton, & Fabiani, 1990).
One method for dealing with this problem is to compare dipole
source models of the observed scalp voltage distributions that are
stable to the addition of further dipoles to the solution (for a similar
logic, see Miltner et al., 1997). We therefore performed such an
analysis for the N2 and ERN. As one would expect given their
similar topographies, the best fitting dipoles for the two compo￾nents lay very close together in medial frontal cortex, as shown in
Figure 12. The single dipole models explained most of the variance
in the data for the ERN (dipole location: x   0.4 cm, y  1.1 cm,
z  5.7 cm; residual variance [RV]  7.2%), and for the N2
difference wave (dipole location: x   0.5 cm, y  1.1 cm, z 
4.6 cm; RV  6.8%).5 Although the ERN and N2 dipole locations
were not identical, the observed difference of 1.1 cm is well within
the range of variability seen in estimates of the dipole source of the
ERN across experimental conditions (e.g., Dehaene et al., 1994;
Holroyd et al., 1998). Even greater variability is observed in the
localization of the N2 across conditions of the same experiment
(Lange et al., 1998; Liotti et al., 2000). In addition, the data from
both conditions were well fit by a single dipole located halfway
between the best fitting locations (ERN: RV  7.2%; N2: RV 
8.4%). The present results are therefore consistent with the hy￾pothesis that the ERN and N2 have a common neural source within
medial frontal cortex.
Relative timing. The upper panel of Figure 13 plots response￾synchronized waveforms for correct congruent, correct incongru￾ent, and error trials at electrode FCz, with a baseline taken from
800 to 700 ms prior to the response. The data were high-pass
filtered with a low cutoff of 2 Hz so that the frontocentral nega￾tivities of interest are not masked by large, slow positive waves
apparent around the response. Figure 13 shows that there was a
period, just prior to the response, of enhanced negativity on in￾congruent trials compared with congruent trials. To quantify this
effect, we calculated the average voltage in a 100-ms window
centered on –100 ms pre-response, separately for the 15 electrode
locations used in the earlier analyses. This analysis revealed that
the waveform on incongruent trials was significantly more nega￾tive than on congruent trials, F(1, 15)  5.11, MSE  5.97, p 
.05. The amplitude of this congruence effect was largest at site
FCz, indicated by reliable interactions between congruence and
anterior-posterior location, F(4, 60)  35.3, MSE  0.49,  
0.29, p  .01, between congruence and laterality, F(2, 30)  7.77,
MSE  0.28,   0.92, p  .01, and between congruence,
anterior-posterior location, and laterality, F(8, 120)  4.93,
MSE  0.02,   0.37, p  .01. Pairwise comparisons revealed
that the effect of congruence at FCz was highly reliable ( p  .01)
and was larger than the effect of congruence at other electrode
locations ( p  .01 at all electrodes except Fz, at Fz p  .20).
The difference between congruent and incongruent trial wave￾forms was largest 88 ms prior to the response. The middle panel of
Figure 13 shows the scalp topography of each waveform at this
time. A frontocentral negativity was apparent on incongruent trials
5 The coordinates of dipole locations are given in a reference frame
based on the location of the nasion and preauricular points. The x value
indicates laterality relative to the midpoint of an axis joining the two
preauricular points (with negative values indicating points to the left of the
midline). The y value gives the distance of the dipole from this axis toward
the nasion (with positive points lying anterior to the preauricular line). The
z value gives the distance of the dipole in the dorsal-ventral direction,
orthogonal to the plane formed by the nasion and preauricular points (with
positive points lying above this plane).
Figure 12. Dipole models of the sources of the error-related negativity
(ERN) and N2 difference waves.
945 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
and, to a lesser extent, on congruent trials also. Consistent with this
being the N2 as observed in the stimulus-locked averages, the
common dipole solution derived above gave a good fit to the scalp
distribution observed on incongruent trials (RV  10.9%).
The lower panel of Figure 13 shows voltage maps for each
condition at the peak of the ERN, 56 ms after the response. The
waveforms on congruent and incongruent correct trials differed
little in the period following the response and showed no evidence
of a negative component at the latency of the ERN (cf. Pailing et
al., 2000; Scheffers & Coles, 2000; Ullsperger & von Cramon,
2001). In contrast, a frontocentral negativity was observed on error
trials at this latency. The scalp topography of this negativity
resembles closely that observed on incongruent trials 144 ms
earlier.
Figure 14 shows a direct comparison between the predictions of
the model and the empirical data at FCz. The simulated N2 is the
difference between correct incongruent and correct congruent tri￾als, the simulated ERN is the error-minus-correct difference wave.
The model provides a good account of the relative timing of the
two components. The difference in peak latency for the empirically
observed N2 and ERN was 144 ms. The corresponding value in the
simulation data was 9 cycles ( 144 ms), a strikingly good fit given
that the model was not parameterized specifically to fit these data.
The model gives a less accurate simulation of the relative ampli￾tudes of the two components, however, failing to reproduce the
large asymmetry seen in the data, and also overestimates the
duration of the two components, discrepancies that might be ad￾dressed in future research.
Further properties of the N2. It might be objected that the
appearance of the N2 in the response-locked waveforms was
simply an artifact of averaging across trials in which a stimulus￾locked N2 occurred just prior to the mean RT. To demonstrate that
this is not the case, and to illustrate further properties of the N2, in
Figure 15 (left panel) we present stimulus-locked waveforms for
correct trials divided into sequential RT bins of 50 ms (cf. Ritter,
Simson, Vaughan, & Friedman, 1979). An N2 is apparent in all but
the fastest RT bins, with a latency and amplitude that vary sys￾tematically as a function of RT. Specifically, the N2 increased in
Figure 13. The relative timing of the N2 and error-related negativity. The upper panel shows response￾synchronized waveforms at FCz for correct congruent, correct incongruent, and error trials. The ordinate
indicates the time of the response. The data were high-pass filtered above 2 Hz to remove the contribution of
slow parietal positivities. The other panels show scalp voltage maps for error trials, correct congruent trials, and
correct incongruent trials at 88 ms before the response (middle panel) and 56 ms after it (lower panel).
946 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
amplitude and latency with increasing RT. N2 amplitude was only
slightly larger for incongruent than for congruent trials within each
RT bin: The overall difference in N2 amplitude between the
conditions evident in Figure 11 reflects the fact that congruent
trials fell largely in the faster RT bins (with small N2 amplitude),
whereas incongruent trials tended to have longer RTs (and large
N2s).
Quantification of these properties was complicated by the fact
that not all participants produced RTs in every 50 ms bin. We
instead selected three consecutive RT bins for each participant so
that there were appreciable numbers of trials, both congruent and
incongruent, in each bin. For 9 of the participants, the bins ran
from 350 to 500 ms, for 4 of the participants, the bins ran from 300
to 450 ms, and for 3 participants the bins covered 250 to 400 ms.
For each bin—fast, medium, and slow—we calculated N2 ampli￾tude and latency separately for the congruent and incongruent trial
waveforms (that were first low-pass filtered below 20 Hz). N2
latency was defined as the time of the most negative peak in a
window from 200 to 400 ms after the stimulus, and N2 amplitude
was defined as the difference in voltage between this peak and the
immediately preceding most positive peak. For 3 participants, no
negative peak was apparent in the waveforms in one or more
conditions. In these cases, the amplitude of the N2 was defined as
zero. In addition, because the latency is undefined for conditions
with no negative peak, we did not include the data from these 3
participants in the latency analysis.
N2 amplitude varied significantly as a function of RT, F(2,
30)  8.84, MSE  11.0,   0.74, p  .01, with a significant
linear trend, F(1, 30)  14.8, MSE  162.1, p  .01. Pairwise
comparisons revealed that N2 amplitude was significantly ( p 
.01) larger for trials in the slow RT bin ( 8.0  V) than for trials
in the medium ( 5.2  V) and fast ( 4.8  V) bins, which did not
themselves differ. In addition, even though the conditions were
matched for RT, N2 amplitude was somewhat larger for incongru￾ent trials ( 6.9  V) than for congruent trials ( 5.1  V), F(1,
15)  12.3, MSE  6.8, p  .01.6
N2 latency increased with RT, F(2, 24)  5.2, MSE  685.2, 

0.73, p  .05, with a reliable linear trend, F(1, 24)  7.0,
MSE  4,807.7, p  .05. Pairwise comparisons revealed that the
N2 peaked significantly later on slow trials (320 ms) than on
medium RT (299 ms, p  .01) or fast RT (300 ms, p  .05) trials,
which did not differ. N2 latency was also slightly increased for
incongruent trials (312 ms) relative to congruent trials (301 ms),
again a reliable difference, F(1, 12)  6.7, MSE  356.6, p  .05.
Importantly, interparticipant variability in N2 latency did not in-
6 An analysis excluding the 3 participants for whom no N2 peak was
evident in one or more of their ERP waveforms found essentially identical
results to those reported above. Thus, the reported effects are not an artifact
of base-to-peak measure that we used, in which N2 amplitude was set to
zero when there was no peak in the ERP waveform. It is also important to
demonstrate that the apparent increase in N2 amplitude with RT is not an
artifact of differential overlap with the P3 component across RT bins. If the
observed effects of RT reflected changes in the P3 component, then such
effects should be even more marked at posterior scalp sites where the P3
is maximal. However, this was not the case: Voltage differences between
RT bins at the peak latency of the N2 were larger at FCz than at parietal
site POz, F(2, 30)  4.4, MSE  8.5,   0.71, p  .05. We also conducted
a temporal principal-components analysis (PCA) with varimax rotation to
separate the contributions of the N2 and P3 to the ERP. The PCA was
conducted on averaged ERP waveforms at electrodes FCz and POz, with
separate waveforms for each participant, for congruent and incongruent
Figure 14. Comparison of observed (top) and predicted (bottom) laten￾cies of the N2 and the error-related negativity (ERN).
Figure 15. The left column shows event-related brain potential (ERP)
waveforms for correct congruent and incongruent trials, separated into
sequential reaction time (RT) bins from 300–350 ms (top panel) through to
500–550 ms (bottom panel). The dotted line indicates the time of the
stimulus (Stim), and the average RT for each bin is indicated with a circle.
The right column shows plots of simulated response conflict, with trials
separated into sequential RT bins of 3 cycles (	 48 ms). Note that there
were too few trials to obtain reliable ERPs for congruent trials in the
500–550 ms bin. In addition, 4 participants produced no responses on
incongruent trials in the 300–350 ms bin, and 2 participants produced no
responses in the 450–500 ms bin on congruent trials: The waveforms for
these conditions are based on the data of the remaining participants.
947 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
crease with RT (fast RTs, SD  39 ms; medium RTs, SD  30 ms;
slow RTs, SD  25 ms). Thus, the broadening of the N2 peak with
increasing RT was not an artifact of increased variability in peak
latency, but instead reflected a real increase in the amplitude of the
N2 component with increasing RT.
In a third analysis, we calculated the latency difference between
the peak of the N2 and the average RT, separately for each RT bin.
This analysis revealed that the N2 peak occurred reliably earlier
than the key-press response (mean latency difference  87 ms),
F(1, 12)  65.1, MSE  4,530.1, p  .01. The interval between
the N2 peak and the response increased reliably with RT, F(2,
24)  44.5, MSE  746.6,   0.72, p  .01, with a significant
linear trend, F(1, 24)  87.2, MSE  65,107.7, p  .01: The
N2–RT interval was larger for trials in the slow RT bin (120 ms)
than in the medium bin (93 ms), and was smallest in the fast RT
bin (49 ms). These latency differences across RT bins were all
reliable ( p  .01). The N2–RT interval did not differ between
congruent and incongruent trials, F(1, 24)  1.
To determine whether the conflict monitoring theory can ac￾count for these detailed properties of the N2, we reanalyzed the
results of Simulation 1, calculating response conflict on correct
trials in sequential RT bins of 3 cycles (	 48 ms). The results of
this analysis, shown in the right-hand panel of Figure 15, accu￾rately replicate a number of features of the empirically observed
N2. First, the conflict signal, like the N2, becomes larger and
broader as RT increases. This feature is present in the model
because conflict between the two response units delays production
of the response, so that RT increases with the degree of conflict
observed. A second feature of the simulation results is that re￾sponse conflict is only slightly larger on incongruent trials than on
congruent trials when the conditions are matched for RT: In the
model, slow responses to congruent stimuli are marked by high
conflict (because of noise in processing) in just the same way as
are slow responses to incongruent stimuli. The overall difference
in conflict between congruent and incongruent trials reflects the
fact that a greater proportion of congruent trials fall in the faster
RT bins (as a result of low conflict), whereas incongruent trials
tend to have greater RTs (as a result of high conflict). Finally, the
interval between the peak of the conflict signal and the response
increases with RT. This property of the model replicates the
observation that the N2–RT interval increases with RT. The
present theory provides a simple explanation of this finding: The
greater the conflict at any given time, the longer it should take
to resolve this conflict and execute one of the competing
responses.
Thus, the simulated data replicate quite closely the patterns
observed in the empirical data, and particularly so in the faster RT
bins. In the 450–500-ms bin, the relationship between empirical
and simulated data is less good: Although empirical N2 amplitude
is similar for congruent and incongruent trials when measured base
to peak, as is the simulated conflict signal, the latency of the
empirical N2 is increased on incongruent trials, a finding not seen
in the simulation data. This discrepancy is worthy of note, but
should be interpreted with caution because there were very few
trials in the empirical data for each participant in the slower RT
bins, particularly for the congruent condition. In the faster RT bins,
for which there were many more trials per condition and hence for
which the ERP waveforms were more stable, the patterns in the
empirical N2 data are very similar to those predicted by the
conflict theory.
Discussion of ERP Results
On the basis of the simulation results, we made two predictions
that were tested in the present experiment. These predictions
concerned the relationship between the ERN and the N2, a com￾ponent that we hypothesize to be a correlate of conflict monitoring
on trials with correct responses. Both of the predictions were
supported by the data. First, the ERN and N2 shared a very similar
scalp topography and neural source (converging results have re￾cently been reported independently by van Veen & Carter, 2002).
Second, the two components differed in their timing, with the N2
preceding the response and the ERN following it. A further com￾parison between the N2 and the simulated conflict signal revealed
that detailed properties of the N2 can be explained by the conflict
monitoring theory.
Conflict, errors, and ACC function. The present findings may
help to interpret findings from fMRI studies of ACC function by
Kiehl et al. (2000) and Menon et al. (2001). These studies found a
common region in caudal ACC that was activated on error trials
and on correct trials with conflict. However, they also found a
region of rostral ACC that activated only on error trials. Both Kiehl
et al. and Menon et al. linked this rostral ACC activation with the
ERN. However, our results, together with converging findings
from van Veen and Carter (2002), suggest that the ERN is gener￾ated in a region of ACC that is sensitive to conflict, most likely
caudal ACC. It is possible that rostral ACC activation following
errors reflects further, perhaps affective, processing of the error,
because this part of ACC is thought to be associated with affective
function (Bush et al., 2000; Devinsky, Morrell, & Vogt, 1995).
Van Veen and Carter have provided evidence in favor of this
hypothesis: Their dipole models of the Pe included a source in
rostral ACC that became active some 200 ms after the initial error.
Another issue to address concerns a recent report from Davies,
Segalowitz, Dywan, and Pailing (2001) of a dissociation between
the ERN and N2. They reasoned that if the ERN and N2 are
related, then participants with a large ERN should also show a
large N2. Davies et al. performed separate correlations between
ERN amplitude and N2 amplitude on congruent trials and between
the ERN and N2 amplitude on incongruent trials and found no
significant correlations. However, of more relevance to the present
hypothesis is the relationship between the ERN and the N2 differ￾ence wave—that is, the difference between incongruent and con￾gruent trials. This difference measure would seem to be a purer
measure of response conflict on correct trials. When we analyzed
our data in this way, we found a reliable correlation between the
trials, and for the fast, medium, and slow RT bins (a total of 192 ERPs).
The first two components revealed by the PCA corresponded to the P3 and
N2, respectively. Critically, the weighting of the N2 component varied
significantly as a function of RT, F(2, 30)  14.9, MSE  6,260.3,  
0.65, p  .01, and more so at FCz than at POz, F(2, 30)  5.08, MSE 
1,588.3,   0.74, p  .05. Pairwise comparisons revealed that N2
amplitude at FCz was larger for slow trials than for medium trials ( p  .01)
and was larger for medium trials than for fast trials ( p  .01), consistent
with the results of our analysis of the raw ERP waveforms. Thus, we
conclude that the effects of RT on N2 amplitude reflect real changes in the
N2 component, not changes in the overlap between N2 and P3.
948 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
amplitudes of the ERN and N2 difference wave across subjects,
r(15)  .60, p  .05. That is, participants with a greater sensitivity
to conflict showed a corresponding greater sensitivity to errors.
Although it may be possible to generate alternative accounts of this
finding, the results are certainly consistent with our theory that
both components reflect a common function, conflict monitoring.
Relation to existing theories of N2 function. We hypothesize
that the N2 component observed in the flanker task may be a
correlate of conflict monitoring. This hypothesis leads us to predict
that conflict-related N2 components should be apparent in other
situations characterized by high response conflict. It is therefore of
interest that N2 components are apparent in the oddball (Ritter et
al., 1979; Ritter, Simson, Vaughan, & Macht, 1982) and go–nogo
tasks (Kok, 1986; Pfefferbaum, Ford, Weller, & Kopell, 1985). In
the oddball task, participants respond to infrequent targets and
withhold responses to frequent distractors; in the go–nogo task,
participants are required to withhold the prepotent go response to
a subset of the stimuli (nogo condition). As noted by Braver et al.
(2001), both oddball and go–nogo tasks should produce high
response conflict, because both require participants to overcome a
prepotent response tendency. Thus, we suggest that N2 compo￾nents observed in the oddball and go–nogo tasks may have a
common origin in conflict monitoring by ACC.
The conflict monitoring theory is broadly consistent with the
proposal of Ritter and colleagues (Ritter et al., 1979, 1982) that the
oddball N2 is related to decision or categorization processes. The
present theory extends this earlier account by specifying precisely
which aspect of the decision process—response conflict—is re￾flected in the N2. In this way, the conflict monitoring theory
provides a natural account of previous findings relating the N2 to
response selection. For example, Ritter et al. (1979) have shown
that the oddball N2 peaks around 100 ms prior to the response and
that its amplitude is increased on trials with longer RTs, consistent
with our simulation and empirical data from the flanker task.
Our theory contrasts with previous accounts of the nogo N2,
which typically associate this component with response inhibition
(e.g., Kok, 1986; see also Kopp et al., 1996). Nieuwenhuis, Yeung,
van den Wildenberg, and Ridderinkhof (2003) have recently com￾pared the inhibition and conflict monitoring accounts of the nogo
N2. They reasoned that if the nogo N2 reflects response conflict,
then it should have a similar neural source and timing to the
oddball N2. Following up the present findings, they also predicted
that the oddball and nogo N2 components would share a neural
source with the ERN. The results were consistent with these
predictions. Thus, the conflict monitoring theory not only provides
an integrative account of the ERN and N2, but also provides a
unified account of N2 components observed in a variety of exper￾imental tasks.
3. Error Detection Through Response Conflict
The previous sections have outlined in detail our hypothesis that
the ERN can be explained in terms of the conflict monitoring
theory. According to this hypothesis, the ERN is not an explicit
signal that an error has occurred, but is rather a signal that there is
response conflict. In this regard, our theory contrasts with existing
accounts of the ERN that associate this component with an explicit
error detection process (e.g., Coles et al., 2001; Falkenstein et al.,
1991, 1995, 2000; Gehring et al., 1993). However, in seeking to
explain the ERN in terms of conflict monitoring rather than ex￾plicit error detection, our theory appears to leave open the question
of how people are able to detect their errors. To answer this
question, we now introduce a new theory of how errors may be
detected in the brain. The basis for this theory is the observation in
our simulations that error trials are characterized by conflict that
develops in the period following the response. Given that this
post-error conflict replicates many properties of the ERN, and
given that the ERN demonstrates many properties expected of an
error-detection system, it seems possible that monitoring for re￾sponse conflict might represent a simple method for detecting
errors. To evaluate this hypothesis, we next present an analysis of
the performance of a simple system that detects errors on the basis
of the total amount of conflict observed in the period following the
response. We then compare the performance of this system with
empirical findings about human error-detection performance.
Performance of a Conflict-Based Error Detector
Consider a system that signals an error has occurred whenever
the amount of conflict in the post-response period exceeds some
threshold. On some proportion of error trials, continued stimulus
processing will lead to post-response activation of the correct
response, resulting in enough post-response conflict to exceed the
detection threshold. This will result in the system correctly detect￾ing the error—these are hit trials. On other error trials, however,
the incorrect response will continue to dominate even after the
response has been produced. The conflict signal would remain
below threshold, and the monitoring system would incorrectly
signal the trial to be correct—these are miss trials. The proportion
of error trials for which the monitor signals an error is given by
P(d error)  ¥ hits / (¥ hits 
 ¥ misses), where d stands for
“detection of an error signaled”—that is, a threshold crossing in
the post-response conflict signal. The sum, ¥, is simply the number
of the relevant events in the experiment. Similarly, we can calcu￾late P(d correct)  ¥ FA / (¥ FA 
 ¥ CR), where FA stands for
false alarm and CR stands for correct rejection. False alarms would
occur when activation of the incorrect response unit followed a
correct response, leading to a suprathreshold conflict signal fol￾lowing the response on a correct trial. Correct rejections would
occur under more normal circumstances, where continued stimulus
processing simply reinforced the correct response decision, and
little or no conflict followed the response.
It is possible to assess the performance of the model by com￾paring P(d error) and P(d correct) for a given detection threshold.
Good performance is indicated by a high value of P(d error),
indicating that most errors are detected, accompanied by a low
value of P(d correct), indicating few false alarms. Plotting
P(d error) against P(d correct) for a range of detection thresholds
gives the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for the
model. Figure 16 (left panel) plots ROC curves for the three
speed–accuracy conditions of Simulation 3. This analysis shows
that error detection based on post-response conflict is most reliable
in the accuracy condition and is least reliable in the speed condi￾tion. Detection in the accuracy condition appears to be quite
reasonable. The point marked on the graph, for example, indicates
that a conflict monitor could detect 75% of all errors, while giving
false alarms on just 4.5% of correct response trials.
949 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
However, given the very different base rates of errors and
correct responses, this detection performance would represent a
very unreliable error signal. In 1,000 trials of the accuracy condi￾tion, for example, the model made 910 correct responses and only
90 errors. Thus, of the error signals produced by the model using
this detection threshold, 41 ( 910 * 0.045) would be false alarms
and only 68 ( 90 * 0.75) would be hits. Thus, of the 109 “error
signals” produced by the model, only 62% would accurately signal
an error. To illustrate this point, the right-hand panel of Figure 16
gives P(d error) as a function of P(error d) for a range of conflict
threshold values, where P(error d)  ¥ hits / (¥ hits 
 ¥ FA), the
probability that a threshold crossing correctly signals an error.
Good error-detection performance is indicated by points toward
the top right of the graph (i.e., most errors being detected and most
threshold crossings corresponding to errors). According to this
analysis, the post-response conflict signal is a poor error signal,
with no points lying in the top right-hand corner of the graph for
any of the three speed–accuracy simulations. With a simple mod￾ification, however, error-detection performance can be dramati￾cally improved.
The reason for the poor performance described above is that,
even for correct trials, conflict is not completely resolved by the
time of the response, but rather continues to be present for a few
cycles afterward. It is therefore possible to improve the sensitivity
of the error monitor by measuring conflict only after some delay
following the response, by which time the correct-trial conflict is
completely resolved and any persisting conflict more specifically
signals an error. Figure 17 presents a plot of P(d error) as a
function of P(error d) for the neutral condition of Simulation 3,
separately for analyses in which the measurement of post-response
conflict began 0, 2, 4, or 6 cycles after the response. The sensitivity
of the model is greatly improved by introducing a delay in this
manner. In the delay 6 condition, for example, the point marked x
on the graph indicates that a suitably thresholded conflict monitor
could detect 92% of errors, with over 80% of threshold crossings
corresponding to errors. Recall that this detection performance
holds in a condition with a high error rate (15%) and in which only
63% of errors were corrected. The corresponding calculation for
the accuracy simulation produced an optimal detection rate of 95%
of errors, with less than 3% of all threshold crossings being false
alarms. This excellent performance was obtained in a condition in
which errors were still quite frequent (error rate  9.9%) and in
which 86% of errors were corrected. Thus, monitoring for post￾response conflict could in principle be a reliable method for
detecting errors. We next relate the results of this analysis to
existing data and theory concerning human error detection.
Comparison With Human Error Detection
Rabbitt (1967, 1968, 2002) has conducted a number of studies
of participants’ error-detection performance. In each of his exper￾iments, participants made errors on around 5% of the trials and
were able to detect 80%–95% of those errors given sufficient time.
The observed rate of error detection is comparable to the perfor￾mance of our conflict-based error detector, particularly for the
accuracy condition of Simulation 3 in which error rates were
similarly low (though still 9.9%). In addition, Rabbitt’s partici￾pants made occasional false alarms, signaling that they had made
an error when in fact they had not. These false alarms constituted
7%–9% of all signaled errors, again comparable to the perfor￾mance of our simple conflict-based error detector. Overall, the
quantitative performance of the model is comparable to that of
human participants.
The present theory is also consistent with findings from Rab￾bitt’s (1967, 1968, 2002) experiments concerning the relationship
between error detection and error correction. The model imple￾ments the idea that continued processing of the stimulus following
errors leads to activation of the correct response. That is, there is
a natural tendency for the model to correct its own errors, a
tendency that forms the basis for our theory of the ERN. In contrast
to automatic error correction, our theory holds that explicit error
detection involves the computation of conflict for some period
after an error is committed and, hence, will be a slower process.
This property of the model is consistent with Rabbitt’s (1968,
2002) finding that participants respond to errors more quickly and
efficiently with a correcting response than when making a com￾mon detection response to all errors.
Figure 16. Performance of a conflict-based error-detection mechanism
applied to data from the three speed–accuracy conditions of Simulation 3.
Left: The probability of error detection as a function of false alarm
proportion. Right: Error-detection rate as a function of the proportion of
threshold crossings that correspond to errors. The dotted line shows per￾formance for one threshold value in the accuracy condition.
Figure 17. Performance of the conflict-based error detector with delays
of 0, 2, 4 and 6 cycles between the response and the conflict monitoring
window. The probability that errors are detected is plotted as a function of
the probability that detection signals correspond to errors.
950 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
As further evidence of the fast, automatic nature of error cor￾rection, Rabbitt et al. (1978) highlighted the very fast error￾correcting responses that are often observed in RT experiments.
Such responses can be observed to follow within 10–20 ms of the
error. Rabbitt et al. noted that it is unlikely that participants could
detect and then correct errors within such short intervals. Instead,
the finding seems more consistent with the idea that participants
sometimes initiate two separate responses in close succession. Of
interest in this regard, the model also corrects some errors very
quickly—within 1–3 cycles of the initial error—and does so, of
course, without having to detect the initial error. Thus, the model
is consistent with Rabbitt’s intuitions on two counts: First, error
correction may occur automatically in a system in which informa￾tion flow is continuous and increasingly accurate over time; and,
second, error correction may in some sense precede error
detection.
A prediction of our theory is that participants’ ability to detect
their own errors should depend systematically on the experimental
context. In the preceding analysis, for example, different speed–
accuracy conditions yielded distinguishable ROC curves for error
detection. We therefore predict that participants encouraged to be
more accurate will not only make fewer errors but will also more
accurately detect those errors that they make. Some preliminary
support for this prediction is provided by a reanalysis of the
error-detection data reported by Rabbitt (1967). Across the 12
conditions of the experiment, there was a reliable negative corre￾lation between error rate and rate of error detection, r(11)  .63,
p  .05, consistent with our prediction. Although it may be
possible to derive alternative explanations of this finding, the
results are at least in line with the predictions of our theory. Future
experiments could provide a more rigorous, quantitative test of this
prediction.
Discussion of Conflict-Based Error Detection
Taken together, our analyses demonstrate that monitoring for
conflict in the period following a response could serve as a method
for detecting errors. This is the case even though the underlying
process does not involve a direct evaluation of response accuracy,
nor does the process involve an explicit comparator mechanism.
Instead, it may be possible to detect errors on the basis of a feature
of processing—the occurrence of conflict following a response—
that is statistically associated with incorrect responses. Although
this account of error detection suggests additional mechanisms
beyond the conflict monitoring unit simulated in our model, the
required computation is very simple: Our analysis suggests that
adequate error detection can be performed using a straightforward
accumulator that signals an error has occurred whenever post￾response conflict exceeds a threshold.
The present theory shares with previous accounts the hypothesis
that error detection relies on the fact that continued stimulus
processing will tend to produce an increasingly reliable represen￾tation of the correct response within the task-processing system
responsible for the initial error (Falkenstein et al., 1991, 2000;
Rabbitt et al., 1978; Rabbitt & Vyas, 1981; Scheffers and Coles,
2000). However, our theory suggests a different view of the
relationship between the ERN and error detection than has been
proposed in previous theories. In particular, according to our
theory, the ERN does not index the process of error detection
itself, but rather reflects post-response conflict that develops fol￾lowing errors. However, as the present analysis demonstrates, this
hypothesis should not be taken to imply that the ERN has nothing
at all to do with error detection: Even if the ERN is generated by
conflict monitoring, it might nonetheless serve as an effective error
signal with little additional machinery. Thus, whereas existing
theories view the ERN as reflecting the output of an error detection
process, our theory suggests that the ERN may in fact reflect the
input to this process. Of course, the present demonstration does not
constitute proof that human error detection in fact relies on conflict
monitoring. Thus, an important goal for future research is to look
for more direct evidence that error detection involves monitoring
for response conflict. A critical step toward this goal will be to
implement contrasting theories of error detection in comparable
detail to ours, allowing predictions of the theories to be contrasted
in a formal, quantitative manner. Our ongoing research has begun
to address this issue (Holroyd, Yeung, Coles, & Cohen, 2004).
Another issue for future research is the extent to which conflict
monitoring may be used to detect errors in other processing sys￾tems. The proposed mechanism for detecting errors makes use of
a simple and quite general property of human information process￾ing: that representations tend to become increasingly accurate over
time. Hence, conflict monitoring may provide reliable information
about errors in processing in a wide range of processing domains.
For example, there are interesting parallels between the issues
considered in this article and issues discussed in the literature on
speech errors (Postma, 2000). Here again there is debate about
whether error detection requires a dedicated monitoring system
(e.g., Levelt, 1989) or whether mistakes can be detected on the
basis of the processing dynamics that characterize speech errors
(e.g., MacKay, 1992). We naturally favor the latter view and
speculate that conflict between representations of intended and
actual speech may be a reliable method for detecting speech errors.
General Discussion
The principal contributions of the present research may be
summarized as follows:
A new theory of the ERN. According to our theory, the ERN
reflects conflict that develops in the period following errors as a
consequence of continued processing of the stimulus. Continued
processing leads to post-error activation of the correct response
and hence conflict with the incorrect response just produced. The
simulation results demonstrate the ability of this theory to explain
findings that have previously been interpreted as challenging it
(Pailing et al., 2000; Scheffers & Coles, 2000; Ullsperger & von
Cramon, 2001), to provide new accounts of existing findings
(Gehring et al., 1993; Holroyd & Coles, 2002), and to provide
insight into the cause of apparently discrepant empirical results
(Gehring et al., 1993; Scheffers et al., 1996).
A new theory of the N2. We propose that the N2, like the ERN,
is a correlate of conflict monitoring. Specifically, we suggest that
the N2 reflects conflict in the period prior to the response on trials
with correct responses. In this way, the conflict monitoring theory
provides a unified account of the N2 components observed in the
flanker, oddball, and go–nogo tasks (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2003) and
provides an integrative account of the N2 and the ERN in terms of
a common underlying mechanism.
951 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
A new theory of error monitoring. An analysis of the simu￾lated dynamics of response conflict suggests that errors may be
detected reliably by monitoring for conflict in the period following
the response. The quantitative performance of a simple conflict￾based error detector was comparable to that observed for human
participants in empirical studies (Rabbitt, 1967, 1968, 2002). We
therefore suggest that the brain may use conflict monitoring as a
computationally simple method for detecting errors.
Comparison With Existing Theories
We have introduced a new theory of the ERN and error detec￾tion in terms of the conflict monitoring theory of ACC function.
According to our theory, the ERN is not an explicit signal that an
error has occurred, but rather reflects the continuous evaluation of
response conflict that may, with simple additional mechanisms, be
used to detect errors reliably. In this regard, our theory stands as an
alternative to the view that error detection involves an explicit
comparison—between the executed response and a separate rep￾resentation of the correct or intended response—and that the ERN
reflects a mismatch signaled during this process. Our theory also
contrasts with a recent computational model of the ERN proposed
by Holroyd and Coles (2002), in which the ERN is held to be a
reinforcement learning signal conveyed to ACC. In what follows,
we directly compare these theories with our own. We then discuss
the issue of whether the ERN reflects directly the process of error
detection or, rather, is an emotional reaction to errors, as has
recently been suggested.
The ERN as a mismatch signal. The most common interpre￾tation of the ERN is that it reflects the outcome of a comparator
process that detects errors as mismatches between the actual re￾sponse and knowledge about the correct or intended response
(Coles et al., 2001; Falkenstein et al., 1991, 2000; Gehring et al.,
1993; Scheffers et al., 1996; Scheffers & Coles, 2000). The rep￾resentation of the actual response is presumed to rely on efference
copy, whereas the representation of the correct or intended re￾sponse is held to be derived from continued processing of the
stimulus after the incorrect response is produced: The notion is that
errors occur when response execution occurs impulsively, before
the stimulus is fully processed and hence before the response
selection system has settled on a final representation of the correct
response. It was initially proposed that the error detector waited
until this final outcome of the response selection process before
making the comparison (Falkenstein et al., 1991), consistent with
the intuitions of Rabbitt and colleagues (Rabbitt & Rodgers, 1977;
Rabbitt & Vyas, 1981). However, the latency of the ERN appears
to be relatively invariant with respect to the response (Leuthold &
Sommer, 1999; Rodrı´guez-Fornells et al., 2002), leading to the
suggestion that the mismatch process may be triggered by response
execution itself (Coles et al., 2001).
It is difficult to compare our theory directly with the mismatch
hypothesis, because this latter account has been described in dif￾ferent ways by different researchers and has yet to be formalized
in computational terms, making it difficult to draw precise predic￾tions from the theory. Nevertheless, there appear to be important
similarities between the mismatch hypothesis and the theory pro￾posed here. In particular, both accounts propose that errors are
detected on the basis of continued stimulus processing to provide
a representation of the correct response that conflicts, or is com￾pared, with a representation of the incorrect response. Moreover,
the conflict-based error detection mechanism we have proposed is
sensitive to conflict only after the response and is in this sense
triggered by response execution, just as is the mismatch detector in
Coles et al.’s (2001) account. Therefore, to the extent that the
conflict and mismatch accounts are part of the same class of
theories of performance monitoring (those that rely on continued
processing of the stimulus to detect errors), the present simulations
make a broad contribution: They represent the first attempt to
provide a formal analysis of what information relevant to error
detection might be present in the response system and of when this
information might become available to a monitoring system.
However, the existence of similarities between the conflict and
mismatch accounts should not be allowed to obscure the fact that
there are also important differences between them. In particular,
whereas the mismatch hypothesis proposes that the ERN reflects
the output of a system specifically devoted to error detection, the
present theory associates the ERN with a process—conflict mon￾itoring—that also occurs on correct trials and which may represent
the input to, rather than the output from, the error detection system.
Thus, there are critical differences in the properties and predictions
of the conflict and mismatch theories. In what follows, we discuss
the implications of two specific differences between the theories.
A first critical difference is that our theory explains the ERN in
terms of the continuous evaluation of response conflict, whereas
the mismatch hypothesis proposes that the ERN indexes the op￾eration of a discrete error-detection process. The proposal that
response conflict is monitored continuously allows our theory to
provide a unified account of the ERN and N2, thus explaining the
close relationship between these components that has been ob￾served in nogo and oddball tasks (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2003) as
well as in the flanker task (as in the present research, and by van
Veen & Carter, 2002). In contrast, mismatch detection is held to be
a discrete process that occurs only at the time of response execu￾tion (Coles et al., 2001) or at some point thereafter (Falkenstein et
al., 1991), raising the issue of whether this hypothesis can account
for the N2. Falkenstein and colleagues have proposed that mis￾match detection occurs only at the end of the response selection
process, and so this account does not seem able to explain the N2
(which occurs prior to the response). Coles et al.’s (2001) more
recent hypothesis may be able to explain the occurrence of the N2
if one assumes that the mismatch process is not only triggered by
response execution but also can be triggered by subthreshold
response activation, partial errors, occurring on trials with high
conflict. However, the notion of partial errors is not part of Coles
et al.’s theory as currently specified, suggesting the need for this
account to specify more precisely the conditions under which the
mismatch process is triggered.
A second difference between the theories is that response con￾flict occurs whenever there is coactivation of competing responses,
whereas a mismatch signal is held to be generated only when there
is an explicit representation of the correct or intended response
within the response selection system that differs from the repre￾sentation of the executed response derived from efference copy
(e.g., Scheffers and Coles, 2000). This property implies that, for a
mismatch to be detected and an ERN generated, at the time of
detection there must be more activation of the correct response
than the incorrect response in the response selection system; oth￾erwise, the intended response, according to the response selection
952 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
system, is still the incorrect one, and there should be no mismatch
with efference copy of the executed response. However, this
property makes it difficult for the mismatch hypothesis to account
for the timing of the ERN: In our simulations, ERN onset is
observed at a time when the incorrect response unit continues to be
more active than the correct response unit (cf. Figure 2).
Rodrı´guez-Fornells et al. (2002) provided electrophysiological ev￾idence consistent with this aspect of the model: Their LRP data
suggest that the correct response becomes more active than the
incorrect response well after error commission, whereas the onset
of the ERN precedes error commission. Hence, at the time of the
ERN, the state of the response selection system—with greater
activation of the incorrect response—should not mismatch with the
efference copy representation of the executed (incorrect) response,
apparently inconsistent with the mismatch hypothesis. In contrast,
our simulations suggest that a small degree of correct response
activation may produce sufficient conflict immediately preceding
errors to begin generating an ERN, even if this activation remains
below that of the incorrect response, and can therefore account for
the timing of the ERN.
The present research thus raises a number of challenges for the
mismatch hypothesis in accounting for detailed properties of the
ERN and its relationship to the N2. It is possible that a formal
instantiation of this hypothesis will account for the empirical data
as well as does the conflict theory. Alternatively, the mismatch
hypothesis may in the future be revised to address the challenges
we have raised. For example, one might propose that the mismatch
process is continuous in nature or can be triggered by partial errors,
perhaps accounting for the N2. Additionally, one might propose
that the mismatch process does not require an explicit representa￾tion of the correct response to detect errors, thus accounting for the
early onset of the ERN. However, these changes would represent
significant departures from the mismatch hypothesis as currently
specified and would move this account closer to ours. In this
regard, an important avenue for future research will be to attempt
the kind of formal investigation of the properties and predictions of
the mismatch hypothesis that we have provided here for the
conflict monitoring theory. This endeavor will help to provide
detailed answers to the questions raised above—regarding how the
mismatch process is triggered, on what representations it depends,
and when this information might become available—so that this
theory can generate precise predictions that can be compared with
those of our theory.
The ERN as a reinforcement learning signal. Holroyd and
Coles (2002) have recently proposed another alternative to the
mismatch account of the ERN. They suggested that the ERN
reflects a reinforcement learning signal that is transmitted to ACC
from the basal ganglia via the mesencephalic dopamine system.
According to this theory, ACC does not itself monitor errors, but
rather receives a signal from the basal ganglia indicating that
outcomes of actions are better or worse than expected. The role of
ACC is then to use this learning signal to adapt the response
selection process. Thus, this reinforcement learning theory of the
ERN formally instantiates the notion, first proposed in association
with the mismatch hypothesis (Coles et al., 1998, 2001; Miltner et
al., 1997), that the ERN reflects the operation of generic error
processing system. However, a different mechanism of error de￾tection is proposed: Response errors are held to be detected as
conjunctions of stimuli and responses associated with negative
outcomes, rather than as mismatches between actual and intended
responses. Holroyd and Coles have implemented this idea using a
simple neural-network architecture based on the method of tem￾poral differences (Schultz, Dayan, & Montague, 1997; Sutton &
Barto, 1998) and used it to model the ERN in a reinforcement
learning task and in the modified flanker task described in Simu￾lation 4.
Support for the reinforcement learning theory comes from the
finding that negative feedback elicits a negative ERP component
that, like the ERN, has a frontocentral scalp topography and a
neural generator in the region of ACC (Miltner et al., 1997). The
co-localization of this feedback ERN and the ERN observed im￾mediately following error commission is consistent with the claim
of the reinforcement learning theory that the ERN reflects the
operation of a generic error processing system. In contrast, the
conflict monitoring theory cannot presently account for the obser￾vation of the feedback ERN, which may be observed even in the
absence of overt responses (Yeung, Holroyd, & Cohen, in press).
At the same time, however, the reinforcement learning theory does
not predict the observation of ACC activity on trials with correct
responses and, hence, cannot account for the co-localization of the
ERN and N2 that was observed in the present research (and also by
Nieuwenhuis et al., 2003; van Veen & Carter, 2002). Thus, al￾though both theories are currently supported by evidence from
dipole modeling suggesting that the ERN co-localizes with a
second component thought to provide an additional index of the
functioning of ACC, the identity of this second component differs
for the two theories, a discrepancy that remains for future research
to resolve.
Further work is therefore required to distinguish between or
reconcile the conflict monitoring and reinforcement learning ac￾counts of the ERN, N2, and feedback ERN. In this regard, it is
important to note that although the theories are superficially very
different, they are not necessarily mutually exclusive. In particular,
whereas our research has focused on how response errors might be
detected on-line, Holroyd and Coles’s (2002) model is primarily
concerned with the issue of how information about response errors
is integrated with other evaluative information and then used in
response selection. Indeed, in their simulation of the data from the
modified flanker task (cf. Simulation 4, above), Holroyd and Coles
did not model any explicit error detection process; instead, infor￾mation about response accuracy was simply provided to the model
as an external signal. Thus, it might be that errors are detected
through conflict monitoring, as we suggest, but that this informa￾tion guides response selection through the kind of reinforcement
learning framework envisioned by Holroyd and Coles. This inte￾gration of the conflict monitoring and reinforcement learning
models of the ERN would help to address outstanding issues with
each approach: For the response conflict theory, the reinforcement
learning framework provides a way of understanding how a
conflict-based error signal might be integrated with other evalua￾tive information—such as performance feedback—in the learning
process and the adaptation of behavior. For the reinforcement
learning theory, the conflict framework provides a computationally
simple method for generating reliable error signals and also pro￾vides a way of understanding why ACC should be so consistently
activated in conditions of response conflict, even in the absence of
overt response errors (as evident in fMRI studies, and from studies
of the N2).
953 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
The complementary strengths of the theories should not, how￾ever, lead us to overlook an important difference between them, at
least as they are currently framed. Specifically, Holroyd and
Coles’s (2002) account of the ERN differs from ours in the
proposed role of the ACC: In the present model, the ERN is
explained in terms of conflict monitoring by ACC, implying that
this area is performing an evaluative function. In contrast, Holroyd
and Coles suggest that ACC is the recipient, rather than generator,
of evaluative information and that it plays a direct role in the
selection of responses. That is, their theory proposes that the ERN
reflects the arrival of an error-related learning signal in anterior
cingulate cortex and that the role of anterior cingulate is to use this
learning signal to improve performance. With regard to this issue,
neuroimaging studies have provided some evidence that ACC
plays an evaluative role, not an executive one (Botvinick et al.,
1999; MacDonald et al., 2000). Moreover, as reviewed above, a
large number of neuroimaging studies have reported ACC activity
on correct trials when there is response conflict, a finding that is
difficult to explain if one assumes that ACC is simply the recipient
of an error signal. Thus, our working hypothesis is that ACC
performs an evaluative role, monitoring for conflict during re￾sponse selection. We leave open the possibility that information
from conflict monitoring may be used in reinforcement learning.
The ERN as an emotional response. It has been proposed that
the ERN reflects an appraisal of the emotional or motivational
significance of errors, rather than reflecting the error-detection
process itself (Bush et al., 2000; Gehring & Willoughby, 2002;
Pailing et al., 2002). The present research has not addressed the
issue of whether the ERN is a cognitive or affective correlate of
errors, and our simulations do not speak directly to this question.
Indeed, given that this affective processing hypothesis leaves open
the issue of how errors are actually detected in the brain, it is
entirely consistent with the present theory. That is, the present
findings are consistent with the idea that error detection relies on
conflict monitoring and that the ERN is an affective correlate of
this conflict monitoring function (that is carried out in some other
part of the brain). Nevertheless, as mentioned above, our working
hypothesis is that ACC is responsible for error detection through
conflict monitoring and that the ERN is a direct correlate of the
conflict monitoring process.
Our working hypothesis is based, in part, on a consideration of
the likely neural source of the ERN. It has been proposed that there
are functional divisions within ACC, with dorsal-caudal regions
implicated in cognitive and motor functions and more ventral￾rostral regions associated with autonomic and affective function
(Bush et al., 2000; Casey, Yeung, & Fosella, 2002; Devinsky et al.,
1995). Previous fMRI studies have found that conflict-related
activity is typically restricted to the caudal part of ACC (e.g.,
Botvinick et al., 1999; Braver et al., 2001; Carter et al., 1998;
Kiehl et al., 2000; Menon et al., 2001), perhaps extending dorsally
into the pre-SMA (Ullsperger & von Cramon, 2001). Therefore, if
the ERN reflects conflict monitoring—as our theory predicts and
as the co-localization of the ERN and N2 suggests—then it should
be generated in caudal regions of ACC associated with cognitive
and motor function.
Also relevant to the issue of whether the ERN might reflect
affective consequences of errors are the findings of Nieuwenhuis
et al. (2001). In a task requiring fast saccades away from a visual
stimulus, participants typically make a number of errors—saccades
toward the stimulus—that are quickly corrected and of which the
participant remains unaware. Nieuwenhuis et al. compared ERN
amplitude following these unperceived errors with ERN amplitude
following errors that the participants correctly detected. This com￾parison is relevant to the present concerns: If the ERN reflects
emotional processing of errors, then it should be absent, or at least
greatly reduced, on trials in which participants remain unaware of
their error. In contrast, if the ERN reflects conflict between the
error and the correcting response, then an ERN should be observed
on trials with unperceived errors because those errors are always
corrected—a circumstance associated with high conflict. Nieuwen￾huis et al.’s results were clear: ERN amplitude was as large
following unperceived errors as following perceived errors, con￾sistent with the predictions of our theory.
However, neither of the preceding lines of evidence definitively
rules out the notion that the ERN is associated with affective
processing. For example, regarding the localization of the ERN in
caudal ACC, it might be argued that caudal ACC is involved in
affective appraisals of cognitive events such as conflict or error
detection (Gehring & Willoughby, 2002). Meanwhile, regarding
the findings of Nieuwenhuis et al. (2001), it might be argued that
participants may not be aware of their own affective responses and
that the ERN to unperceived errors reflects these subconscious
affective responses. Thus, although it seems plausible that partic￾ipants should have greater affective responses to errors of which
they are aware—particularly given how strongly they typically
express their frustration in such cases—because Nieuwenhuis et
al. did not directly measure affect or autonomic activity, it is
impossible to rule out the hypothesis that participants in their study
had strong, yet unperceived affective responses that might account
for the observed ERN.
Overall, therefore, existing evidence is equivocal as to whether
the ERN reflects cognitive or affective aspects of error processing.
Indeed, to the extent that error detection may be inextricably linked
to affective and motivational functioning, it may be impossible to
separate out cognitive and emotional correlates of error detection
(cf. Holroyd, Nieuwenhuis, Yeung, & Cohen, 2003; Yeung, 2004).
This notion is perhaps best illustrated in terms of the proposed
functional role of conflict monitoring. In particular, although the
present research has focused on conflict monitoring as it relates to
error detection and the ERN, an important aspect of the theory
concerns how information about response conflict might be used in
the adaptive control of behavior (Botvinick et al., 2001). Accord￾ing to the theory, detection of response conflict typically leads to
increased attentional focus. However, if conflict is sustained over
a long period—indicating that increased effort may be insufficient
to reduce conflict—participants may tend to disengage from
the task (Cohen et al., 2000; Usher, Cohen, Servan-Schreiber,
Rajkowski, & Aston-Jones, 1999).
One hypothesis worthy of future investigation is that the pro￾posed consequences of conflict detection provide an account of the
functional role of affective reactions (Yeung, 2004). For example,
an increase in attentional focus following conflict detection may be
expressed in terms of autonomic changes related to increased
alertness and arousal. Correspondingly, sustained conflict that
leads to disengagement from the task may be expressed in terms of
subjective feelings of frustration. On this view, it does not make
sense to ask whether the ERN reflects cognitive monitoring or
functions related to affect or motivation, as these are proposed to
954 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
be one and the same process. That is, conflict monitoring should
not be considered to be separate from affective processing. Instead,
in providing information that has direct motivational significance,
conflict monitoring may provide the computational basis underly￾ing what are observed and experienced as affective reactions.
Extensions and Future Directions
An attractive feature of the conflict monitoring theory is its
computational simplicity: In our model, conflict was calculated
directly as the product of the activation levels of competing re￾sponse units. Much of the computational simplicity derives from
the proposal that performance monitoring can rely on detecting
features of processing that are reliably associated with poor per￾formance, instead of relying on a mechanism that uses explicit
information about the correct response or response accuracy. How￾ever, the feature of processing we have focused on here—the
occurrence of response conflict—does rely on there being an
established task set with mutually incompatible responses. The
establishment of a task set is a complex process, and investigation
of the mechanisms by which task sets are created, maintained, and
switched is the focus of ongoing research (Allport, Styles, &
Hsieh, 1994; Braver & Cohen, 2000; Gilbert & Shallice, 2002;
Logan & Gordon, 2001; Rogers & Monsell, 1995; Rubinstein,
Meyer, & Evans, 2001; Yeung & Monsell, 2003a, 2003b). Such
issues are beyond the scope of the present research: We have been
concerned solely with how one might monitor performance once a
task set is established. Nonetheless, an important avenue for future
research will be to determine how a task set is created such that
otherwise compatible responses (e.g., key-presses with the left and
right hands) are set in mutual opposition and how a conflict
monitoring mechanism might be sensitive to this aspect of task set.
These challenges notwithstanding, the present research demon￾strates that the conflict monitoring theory can account for observed
properties of the ERN and human error-detection performance. In
this way, the theory explains how findings from electrophysiolog￾ical studies can be reconciled with the growing literature from
neuroimaging studies showing activity in ACC associated with
conditions of response competition and errors (e.g., Braver et al.,
2001; Carter et al., 1998; Garavan et al., 2002; Kiehl et al., 2000;
MacDonald et al., 2000; Menon et al., 2001). These studies have
typically reported that caudal ACC shows the predicted sensitivity
to response conflict and errors, suggesting that this region is
involved in the continuous monitoring of response conflict. An
intriguing possibility suggested by recent research is that other
regions in the medial wall may perform more specialized conflict
monitoring functions. In particular, it has been suggested that
dorsal regions in SMA or pre-SMA might be selectively activated
by response conflict on trials with correct responses, whereas more
rostral areas in ACC might selectively respond on error trials
(Braver et al., 2001; Garavan et al., 2002; Garavan, Ross, Kauf￾man, & Stein, 2003; Kiehl et al., 2000; Menon et al., 2001;
Ullsperger & von Cramon, 2001). One possibility is that caudal
ACC performs a general conflict monitoring function—and is thus
activated by response conflict and errors—whereas pre-SMA and
rostral ACC selectively monitor for pre- and post-response con￾flict, respectively, and are thus selectively activated by conflict on
correct trials and by incorrect responses. This hypothesis warrants
attention in future research.
The conflict monitoring theory may thus provide a unifying
account of ACC activity observed in fMRI and ERP research.
However, as discussed above, the theory in its present form does
not attempt to explain the feedback ERN (Holroyd & Coles, 2002;
Miltner et al., 1997) or the related component that is observed
following late responses in experiments with response deadlines
(Johnson et al., 1997; Luu et al., 2000; Pailing et al., 2000). The
feedback and late-response ERNs have a similar scalp topography
to the response-related ERN and, likewise, appear to be generated
in the region of ACC (Miltner et al., 1997). Hence, the present
theory may need to be extended in order to account for these ERP
findings. We suggested above that the reinforcement learning theory
proposed by Holroyd and Coles (2002) might provide a framework
for understanding how information from conflict monitoring might be
integrated with information from external feedback and other
sources. On this account, conflict monitoring would provide just
one of many inputs into the reinforcement learning process occur￾ring in ACC, all of which generate ERN-like scalp potentials.
Any such attempt to provide a complete, unified account of
ACC function may, however, need to take into account recent
evidence of anatomical dissociations between regions of ACC
sensitive to response errors and negative feedback (Carter, van
Veen, Holroyd, Stenger, & Cohen, 2002; Gehring & Fencsik,
2001). Nevertheless, we speculate that different subregions of
ACC perform related functions, all of which are responsible for
evaluating internal states for evidence of breakdowns in processing
and all of which can guide adjustments in control needed to
improve performance. This broader view of ACC function can
account for the variety of conditions under which ACC activity is
observed, including response conflict and errors, negative feed￾back, and even pain (Craig, Reiman, Evans, & Bushnell, 1996;
Peyron, Laurent, & Garcia-Larrea, 2000; Rainville, Duncan, Price,
Carrier, & Bushnell, 1997; Vogt, Sikes, & Vogt, 1993). Such a
class of functions would complement those responsible for mon￾itoring the external environment for signs of threat, such as has
been ascribed to the amygdala (LeDoux, 1996).
In summary, according to a broader view of ACC function,
response conflict may be one valuable information source—that
can provide early information about breakdowns in processing in
the absence of explicit feedback—out of the many used by ACC
in the evaluation of ongoing performance. The contribution of the
present research is therefore to provide a computationally specified
theory of one specific aspect of ACC function: monitoring of
response conflict and its use in detecting errors. An important goal
for future research will be to provide correspondingly detailed
accounts of other proposed functions of ACC, which might include
monitoring for conflict in other aspects of information processing
and the processing of explicit performance feedback. One can then
begin to investigate how information from response conflict mon￾itoring might be integrated in ACC with information from these
other sources and then used in the control of cognitive processing.
Conclusion
The present research has introduced a new account of the ERN,
N2, and error detection in terms of the response conflict monitor￾ing theory of anterior cingulate function. Through simulation and
experiment, we have attempted to demonstrate that the conflict
monitoring theory can provide a detailed account of a large corpus
955 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
of existing, and in some cases counterintuitive, findings regarding
behavioral and electrophysiological phenomena related to perfor￾mance monitoring. In providing an alternative to existing accounts
of these phenomena, our theory attempts to answer a number of
critical questions: Is the evaluative process indexed by the ERN a
continuous one or is it a discrete process triggered by response
execution (or some later event)? Does error detection require an
explicit representation of the correct response or can it be based on
detecting features of processing (such as post-response conflict)
that are reliably associated with error commission? At what time
might such information be available to the monitoring system, and
is this timing consistent with the observed properties of the ERN?
We have attempted to answer these questions by grounding our
theory in a mechanistically explicit model. An important goal for
future research will be to specify competing theories in compara￾ble detail in order to provide answers to the questions raised above.
Doing so will allow these accounts and ours to be compared in a
rigorous, quantitative manner. However, to the extent that ours is
currently the only theory that has been shown to account for the
timing of the ERN, its sensitivity to the range of manipulations we
simulate, and the properties of the ERP in the absence of errors, we
believe that it represents a plausible account of the relationship
between the ERN and error processing, one that needs to be
considered alongside existing theories as we seek to understand the
mechanisms underlying human performance monitoring.
References
Allport, D. A. (1980). Attention and performance. In G. Claxton (Ed.),
Cognitive psychology: New directions (pp. 112–153). London: Rout￾ledge and Kegan Paul.
Allport, D. A. (1987). Selection for action: Some behavioural and neuro￾physiological considerations of attention and action. In H. Heuer & A. F.
Sanders (Eds.), Perspectives on perception and action (pp. 395–419).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Allport, D. A., Styles, E. A., & Hsieh, S. (1994). Shifting intentional set:
Exploring the dynamic control of tasks. In C. Umilta & M. Moscovitch
(Eds.), Attention and performance XV (pp. 421–452). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Barch, D. M., Braver, T. S., Sabb, F. W., & Noll, D. C. (2000). Anterior
cingulate and the monitoring of response conflict: Evidence from an
fMRI study of overt verb generation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
12, 298–309.
Bench, C. J., Frith, C. D., Grasby, P. M., Friston, K. J., Paulesu, E.,
Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Dolan, R. J. (1993). Investigations of the
functional anatomy of attention using the Stroop test. Neuropsychologia,
9, 907–922.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Carter, C. S., Barch, D. M., & Cohen, J. D.
(2001). Evaluating the demand for control: Anterior cingulate cortex and
crosstalk monitoring. Psychological Review, 108, 624–652.
Botvinick, M. M., Nystrom, L. E., Fissell, K., Carter, C. S., & Cohen, J. D.
(1999). Conflict monitoring versus selection-for-action in anterior cin￾gulate cortex. Nature, 402, 179–181.
Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Gray, J. R., Molfese, D. L., & Snyder, A.
(2001). Anterior cingulate cortex and response conflict: Effects of fre￾quency, inhibition and errors. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 825–836.
Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (2000). On the control of control: The role
of dopamine in regulating prefrontal function and working memory. In
S. Monsell & J. S. Driver (Eds.), Control of cognitive processes:
Attention and performance XVIII (pp. 713–737). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Bush, G., Luu, P., & Posner, M. I. (2000). Cognitive and emotional
influences in anterior cingulate cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4,
215–222.
Carter, C. S., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Botvinick, M. M., Noll, D., &
Cohen, J. D. (1998, May 1). Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection,
and the online monitoring of performance. Science, 280, 747–749.
Carter, C. S., van Veen, V., Holroyd, C. B., Stenger, V. A., & Cohen, J. D.
(2002, June). Errors and conflict but not error feedback engage the
anterior cingulate cortex during event-related fMRI: Implications for
performance monitoring in the human brain. Paper presented at the 8th
International conference on functional mapping of the human brain,
Sendai, Japan.
Casey, B. J., Yeung, N., & Fosella, J. (2002). Anterior cingulate cortex. In
V. S. Ramachandran (Ed.), Encyclopedia of the human brain (Vol. 1, pp.
145–157). Boston: Academic Press.
Cohen, J. D., Botvinick, M. M., & Carter, C. S. (2000). Anterior cingulate
and prefrontal cortex: Who’s in control? Nature Neuroscience, 3, 421–
423.
Cohen, J. D., & Servan-Schreiber, D. (1992). Context, cortex and dopa￾mine: A connectionist approach to behaviour and biology in schizophre￾nia. Psychological Review, 99, 45–77.
Cohen, J. D., Servan-Schreiber, D., & McClelland, J. L. (1992). A parallel
distributed processing approach to automaticity. American Journal of
Psychology, 105, 239–269.
Coles, M. G. H., Gratton, G., Bashore, T. R., Eriksen, C. W., & Donchin,
E. (1985). A psychophysiological investigation of the continuous flow
model of human information processing. Journal of Experimental Psy￾chology: Human Perception and Performance, 11, 529–553.
Coles, M. G. H., Gratton, G., & Fabiani, M. (1990). Event-related brain
potentials. In J. T. Cacioppo & L. G. Tassinary (Eds.), Principles of
psychophysiology: Physical, social and inferential elements (pp. 413–
455). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Coles, M. G. H., Scheffers, M. K., & Holroyd, C. B. (1998). Berger’s
dream? The error-related negativity and modern cognitive psychophys￾iology. In H. Witte, U. Zwiener, B. Schack, & A. Doring (Eds.),
Quantitative and topological EEG and MEG analysis (pp. 96–102).
Jena-Erlangen, Germany: Druckhaus Mayer Verlag.
Coles, M. G. H., Scheffers, M. K., & Holroyd, C. (2001). Why is there an
ERN/Ne on correct trials? Response representations, stimulus-related
components, and the theory of error-processing. Biological Psychology,
56, 173–189.
Craig, A. D., Reiman, E. M., Evans, A. C., & Bushnell, M. C. (1996).
Functional imaging of an illusion of pain. Nature, 384, 258–260.
Crosson, B., Sadek, J. R., Bobholz, J. A., Gokcay, D., Mohr, C. M.,
Leonard, C. M., et al. (1999). Activity in the paracingulate and cingulate
sulci during word generation: An fMRI study of functional anatomy.
Cerebral Cortex, 9, 307–316.
Davies, P. L., Segalowitz, S. J., Dywan, J., & Pailing, P. E. (2001).
Error-negativity and positivity as they relate to other ERP indices of
attentional control and stimulus processing. Biological Psychology, 56,
191–206.
Dehaene, S., Posner, M. I., & Tucker, D. M. (1994). Localization of a
neural system for error detection and compensation. Psychological Sci￾ence, 5, 303–305.
Devinsky, O., Morrell, M. J., & Vogt, B. A. (1995). Contributions of
anterior cingulate cortex to behaviour. Brain, 118, 279–306.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise letters upon the
identification of target letters in a non-search task. Perception and
Psychophysics, 16, 143–149.
Eriksen, C. W., Coles, M. G. H., Morris, L. R., & O’Hara, W. P. (1985).
An electromyographic examination of response competition. Bulletin of
the Psychonomic Society, 23, 165–168.
Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., & Hoorman, J. (1995). Event-related po￾tential correlates of errors in reaction tasks. In G. Karmos, M. Molnar,
956 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
V. Csepe, I. Czigler, & J. E. Desmedt (Eds.), Perspectives of event￾related potentials research (pp. 287–296). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoorman, J., & Blanke, L. (1990). Effects
of errors in choice reaction tasks on the ERP under focused and divided
attention. In C. H. M. Brunia, A. W. K. Gaillard, & A. Kok (Eds.),
Psychophysiological brain research (Vol. 1, pp. 192–195). Tilburg, the
Netherlands: Tilburg University Press.
Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoorman, J., & Blanke, L. (1991). Effects
of crossmodal divided attention on late ERP components: II. Error
processing in choice reaction tasks. Electroencephalography and Clin￾ical Neurophysiology, 78, 447–455.
Falkenstein, M., Hoorman, J., Christ, S., & Hohnsbein, J. (2000). ERP
components on reaction errors and their functional significance: A
tutorial. Biological Psychology, 51, 87–107.
Garavan, H., Ross, H., Kaufman, T. J., & Stein, E. A. (2003). A midline
dissociation between error processing and response conflict monitoring.
NeuroImage, 20, 1132–1139.
Garavan, H., Ross, T. J., Murphy, K., Roche, R. A. P., & Stein, E. A.
(2002). Dissociable executive functions in the dynamic control of be￾havior: Inhibition, error detection, and correction. Neuroimage, 17,
1820–1829.
Gehring, W. J., & Fencsik, D. (1999, April). Slamming on the brakes: An
electrophysiological study of error response inhibition. Paper presented
at the annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society, Washing￾ton, DC.
Gehring, W. J., & Fencsik, D. (2001). Functions of the medial frontal
cortex in the processing of conflict and errors. Journal of Neuroscience,
21, 9430–9437.
Gehring, W. J., Goss, B., Coles, M. G. H., Meyer, D. E., & Donchin, E.
(1993). A neural system for error detection and compensation. Psycho￾logical Science, 4, 385–390.
Gehring, W. J., Gratton, G., Coles, M. G. H., & Donchin, E. (1992).
Probability effect on stimulus evaluation and response processes. Jour￾nal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
18, 198–216.
Gehring, W. J., Himle, J., & Nisenson, L. G. (2000). Action-monitoring
dysfunction in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychological Science,
11, 1–6.
Gehring, W. J., & Willoughby, A. R. (2002, March 22). The medial frontal
cortex and the rapid processing of utility information. Science, 295,
2279–2282.
Gemba, H., Sasaki, K., & Brooks, V. B. (1986). “Error” potentials in
limbic cortex (anterior cingulate area 24) of monkeys during motor
learning. Neuroscience Letters, 70, 223–227.
Gilbert, S. J., & Shallice, T. (2002). Task switching: A PDP model.
Cognitive Psychology, 44, 297–337.
Gratton, G., Coles, M. G. H., & Donchin, E. (1992). Optimizing the use of
information: Strategic control of activation of responses. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 121, 480–506.
Gratton, G., Coles, M. G. H., Sirevaag, E. J., Eriksen, C. W., & Donchin,
E. (1988). Pre- and poststimulus activation of response channels: A
psychophysiological analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Hu￾man Perception and Performance, 14, 331–344.
Greenblatt, R. E., & Robinson, S. E. (1994). A simple head shape approx￾imation for the 3 shell model. Brain Topography, 6, 331.
Heil, M., Osman, A., Wiegelmann, J., Rolke, B., & Henninghausen, E.
(2000). N200 in the Eriksen-Task: Inhibitory executive processes? Jour￾nal of Psychophysiology, 14, 218–225.
Holroyd, C. B., & Coles, M. G. H. (2002). The neural basis of human error
processing: Reinforcement learning, dopamine, and the error-related
negativity. Psychological Review, 109, 679–709.
Holroyd, C. B., Dien, J., & Coles, M. G. H. (1998). Error-related scalp
potentials elicited by hand and foot movements: Evidence for an output￾independent error-processing system in humans. Neuroscience Letters,
242, 65–68.
Holroyd, C. B., Nieuwenhuis, S., Yeung, N., & Cohen, J. D. (2003). Errors
in reward prediction are reflected in the event-related brain potential.
NeuroReport, 14, 2481–2484.
Holroyd, C. B., Praamstra, P., Plat, E., & Coles, M. G. H. (2002). Spared
error-related potentials in mild to moderate Parkinson’s disease. Neuro￾psychologia, 40, 2116–2124.
Holroyd, C. B., Yeung, N., Coles, M. G. H., & Cohen, J. D. (2004). A
mechanism for error detection in speeded response time tasks. Manu￾script submitted for publication.
Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emer￾gent collective computational abilities. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 79, 2554–2558.
Johnson, T. M., Otten, L. J., Boeck, K., & Coles, M. G. H. (1997). Am I
too late? The neural consequences of missing a deadline. Psychophysi￾ology, 34, S48.
Kiehl, K. A., Liddle, P. F., & Hopfinger, J. B. (2000). Error processing and
the rostral anterior cingulate: An event-related fMRI study. Psychophys￾iology, 37, 216–223.
Kok, A. (1986). Effects of degradation of visual stimuli on components of
the event-related potential (ERP) in go/nogo reaction tasks. Biological
Psychology, 23, 21–38.
Kopp, B., Rist, F., & Mattler, U. (1996). N200 in the flanker task as a
neurobehavioral tool for investigating executive control. Psychophysi￾ology, 33, 282–294.
Lange, J. J., Wijers, A. A., Mulder, L. J. M., & Mulder, G. (1998). Color
selection and location selection in ERPs: Differences, similarities and
“neural specificity”. Biological Psychology, 48, 153–182.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Leuthold, H., & Sommer, W. (1999). ERP correlates of error processing in
spatial S-R compatibility tasks. Clinical Neurophysiology, 110, 342–
357.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cam￾bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Liotti, M., Woldorff, M. G., Perez, R., & Mayberg, H. S. (2000). An ERP
study of the temporal course of the Stroop color–word interference
effect. Neuropsychologia, 38, 701–711.
Logan, G. D., & Gordon, R. D. (2001). Executive control of visual
attention in dual-task situations. Psychological Review, 108, 393–434.
Luu, P., Flaisch, T., & Tucker, D. M. (2000). Medial frontal cortex in
action monitoring. Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 464–469.
MacDonald, A. W., Cohen, J. D., Stenger, V. A., & Carter, C. S. (2000,
June 9). Dissociating the role of dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior
cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science, 288, 1835–1838.
MacKay, D. G. (1992). Awareness and error detection: New theories and
research paradigms. Consciousness and Cognition, 1, 199–225.
Maylor, E. A., & Rabbitt, P. M. A. (1987). Effects of alcohol and practice
on choice reaction time. Perception and Psychophysics, 42, 465–475.
McCarthy, G., & Wood, C. C. (1985). Scalp distributions of event-related
potentials: An ambiguity associated with analysis of variance models.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 62, 203–208.
Menon, V., Adleman, N. E., White, C. D., Glover, G. H., & Reiss, A. L.
(2001). Error-related brain activation during a Go/NoGo response inhi￾bition task. Human Brain Mapping, 12, 131–143.
Miltner, W. H. R., Braun, C. H., & Coles, M. G. H. (1997). Event-related
potentials following incorrect feedback in a time-estimation task: Evi￾dence for a “generic” neural system for error detection. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 788–798.
Neumann, O. (1987). Beyond capacity: A functional view of attention. In
H. Heuer & A. F. Sanders (Eds.), Perspectives on perception and action
(pp. 395–419). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nieuwenhuis, S., Ridderinkhof, K. R., Blom, J., Band, G. P. H., & Kok, A.
(2001). Error-related brain potentials are differentially related to aware-
957 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
ness of response errors: Evidence from an antisaccade task. Psychophys￾iology, 38, 752–760.
Nieuwenhuis, S., Yeung, N., van den Wildenberg, W., & Ridderinkhof,
K. R. (2003). Electrophysiological correlates of anterior cingulate func￾tion in a Go/NoGo task: Effects of response conflict and trial-type
frequency. Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 3, 17–26.
Norman, D. A., & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action: Willed and
automatic control of behaviour. In R. J. Davidson, G. E. Schwartz, & D.
Shapiro (Eds.), Consciousness and self-regulation (pp. 1–18). New
York: Plenum.
Pailing, P. E., Segalowitz, S. J., & Davies, P. L. (2000). Speed of respond￾ing and the likelihood of error-like activity in correct trial ERPs. Psy￾chophysiology, 37, S76.
Pailing, P. E., Segalowitz, S. J., Dywan, J., & Davies, P. L. (2002). Error
negativity and response control. Psychophysiology, 39, 198–206.
Pardo, J. V., Pardo, P. J., Janer, K. W., & Raichle, M. E. (1990). The
anterior cingulate cortex mediates processing selection in the Stroop
attentional conflict paradigm. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 87, 256–259.
Paus, T., Koski, L., Caramanos, Z., & Westbury, C. (1998). Regional
differences in the effects of task difficulty and motor output on blood
flow response in the human anterior cingulate cortex: A review of 107
PET activation studies. NeuroReport, 9, R37–R47.
Paus, T., Petrides, M., Evans, A. C., & Meyer, E. (1993). Role of human
anterior cingulate cortex in the control of oculomotor, manual, and
speech responses: A positron emission tomography study. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 20, 453–469.
Peyron, R., Laurent, B., & Garcia-Larrea, L. (2000). Functional imaging of
brain responses to pain. A review and meta-analysis. Neurophysiology
Clinique–Clinical Neurophysiology, 30, 263–288.
Pfefferbaum, A., Ford, J. M., Weller, B. J., & Kopell, B. S. (1985). ERPs
to response production and inhibition. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, 60, 423–434.
Postma, A. (2000). Detection of errors during speech production: A review
of speech monitoring models. Cognition, 77, 97–131.
Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., & Vetterling, W. T. (1992).
Numerical recipes in C (2nd Edition). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Pritchard, W. S., Shappell, S. A., & Brandt, M. E. (1991). Psychophysi￾ology of N200/N400: A review and classification scheme. In J. R.
Jennings, P. K. Ackles, & M. G. H. Coles (Eds.), Advances in psycho￾physiology (Vol. 4, pp. 43–106). London: Jessica Kingsley.
Rabbitt, P. M. A. (1966). Error correction time without external error
signals. Nature, 212, 438.
Rabbitt, P. M. A. (1967). Time to detect errors as a function of factors
affecting choice-reaction time. Acta Psychologica, 27, 131–142.
Rabbitt, P. M. A. (1968). Three kinds of error-signalling responses in a
serial choice task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20,
179–188.
Rabbitt, P. M. A. (1990). Age, IQ and awareness, and recall of errors.
Ergonomics, 33, 1291–1305.
Rabbitt, P. M. A. (2002). Consciousness is slower than you think. Quar￾terly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1081–1092.
Rabbitt, P. M. A., Cumming, G., & Vyas, S. M. (1978). Some errors of
perceptual analysis in visual search can be detected and corrected.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 30, 319–332.
Rabbitt, P. M. A., & Rodgers, B. (1977). What does a man do after he
makes an error? An analysis of response programming. Quarterly Jour￾nal of Experimental Psychology, 29, 727–743.
Rabbitt, P. M. A., & Vyas, S. M. (1981). Processing a display even after
you make a response to it. How perceptual errors can be corrected.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 223–239.
Rainville, P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., Carrier, B., & Bushnell, M. C.
(1997, August 15). Pain affect encoded in human anterior cingulate but
not somatosensory cortex. Science, 277, 968–971.
Ritter, W., Simson, R., Vaughan, H. G., & Friedman, D. (1979, March 30).
A brain event related to the making of a sensory discrimination. Science,
203, 1358–1361.
Ritter, W., Simson, R., Vaughan, H. G., & Macht, M. (1982, November
26). Manipulation of event-related potential manifestations of informa￾tion processing stages. Science, 218, 909–911.
Rodrı´guez-Fornells, A., Kurzbuch, A. R., & Mu¨nte, T. F. (2002). Time
course of error detection and correction in humans: Neurophysiological
evidence. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 9990–9996.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a predictable switch between
simple cognitive tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
124, 207–231.
Rubia, K., Russell, T., Overmeyer, S., Brammer, M. J., Bullmore, E. T.,
Sharma, T., et al. (2001). Mapping motor inhibition: Conjunctive brain
activations across different versions of go/no-go and stop tasks. Neuro￾Image, 13, 250–261.
Rubinstein, J., Meyer, D. E., & Evans, J. E. (2001). Executive control of
cognitive processes in task switching. Journal of Experimental Psychol￾ogy: Human Perception and Performance, 27, 763–797.
Rush, S., & Driscoll, D. A. (1968). Current distributions in the brain from
surface electrodes. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 47, 717–723.
Scheffers, M. K. (1999). Performance monitoring: Error detection and the
error-related negativity in choice–reaction time tasks. Unpublished doc￾toral dissertation, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign.
Scheffers, M. K., & Coles, M. G. H. (2000). Performance monitoring in a
confusing world: Error-related brain activity, judgements of response
accuracy, and types of errors. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 26, 141–151.
Scheffers, M. K., Coles, M. G. H., Bernstein, P., Gehring, W. J., &
Donchin, E. (1996). Event-related potentials and error-related process￾ing: An analysis of incorrect responses to go and no-go stimuli. Psy￾chophysiology, 33, 42–53.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997, March 14). A neural
substrate of prediction and reward. Science, 275, 1593–1599.
Servan-Schreiber, D., Bruno, R. M., Carter, C. S., & Cohen, J. D. (1998).
Dopamine and the mechanisms of cognition: Part I. A neural network
model predicting dopamine effects on selective attention. Biological
Psychiatry, 43, 713–722.
Servan-Schreiber, D., Carter, C. S., Bruno, R. M., & Cohen, J. D. (1998).
Dopamine and the mechanisms of cognition: Part II. D-amphetamine
effects in human subjects performing a selective attention task. Biolog￾ical Psychiatry, 43, 723–729.
Spencer, K. M., & Coles, M. G. H. (1999). The lateralized readiness
potential: Relationship between human data and response activation in a
connectionist model. Psychophysiology, 36, 364–370.
Stuphorn, V., Taylor, T. L., & Schall, J. D. (2000). Performance monitor￾ing by the supplementary eye field. Nature, 408, 857–860.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An intro￾duction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Taylor, S. F., Kornblum, S., Minoshima, S., Oliver, L. M., & Koeppe, R. A.
(1994). Changes in medial cortical blood flow with a stimulus-response
compatibility task. Neuropsychologia, 32, 249–255.
Thompson-Schill, S. L., D’Esposito, M., Aguirre, G. K., & Farah, M. J.
(1997). Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic
knowledge: A reevaluation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 94, 14792–14797.
Ullsperger, M., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2001). Subprocesses of performance
monitoring: A dissociation of error processing and response competition
revealed by event-related fMRI and ERPs. NeuroImage, 14, 1387–1401.
Usher, M., Cohen, J. D., Servan-Schreiber, D., Rajkowski, J., & Aston￾Jones, G. (1999, January 22). The role of locus coeruleus in the regu￾lation of cognitive performance. Science, 283, 549–554.
958 YEUNG, BOTVINICK, AND COHEN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
van Veen, V., & Carter, C. S. (2002). The timing of action monitoring in
rostral and caudal anterior cingulate cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neu￾roscience, 14, 593–602.
Vidal, F., Hasbroucq, T., Grapperon, J., & Bonnet, M. (2000). Is the “error
negativity” specific to errors? Biological Psychology, 51, 109–128.
Vogt, B. A., Sikes, R. W., & Vogt, L. J. (1993). Anterior cingulate cortex
and the medial pain system. In B. A. Vogt & M. Gabriel (Eds.),
Neurobiology of cingulate cortex and limbic thalamus: A comprehensive
handbook (pp. 313–344). Boston: Birkhauser.
Yeung, N. (2004). Relating cognitive and affective theories of the error￾related negativity. In M. Ullsperger & M. Falkenstein (Eds.), Errors,
conflicts, and the brain. Current opinions on performance monitoring
(pp. 63–70). Leipzig, Germany: Max Planck Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience.
Yeung, N., Holroyd, C. B., & Cohen, J. D. (in press). ERP correlates of
feedback and reward processing in the presence and absence of response
choice. Cerebral Cortex.
Yeung, N., & Monsell, S. (2003a). The effects of recent practice on task
switching. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 29, 919–936.
Yeung, N., & Monsell, S. (2003b). Switching between tasks of unequal
familiarity: The role of stimulus-attribute and response-set selection.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Perfor￾mance, 29, 255–269.
Appendix
Simulation Details
On each trial, the network was run for 3 preparatory cycles, then for 50
further cycles. On each cycle, the activation of each unit was calculated
according to its net input. The net input to each unit of the behavioral
network was given by:
neti   exti * estr   actjwijs  noise,
where exti is the external input to the unit, estr is a constant scaling the
external input to each unit (set equal to 0.4), actj is the activation of the
sending unit on the previous time step, wij is the weight of the connection
between the two units, and s is a scaling parameter, set to 0.08 for
excitatory weights and 0.12 for inhibitory weights. Noise is normally
distributed with a mean of 0.00 and a standard deviation of 0.035.
Net inputs were initialized to zero at the start of each trial. An external
input of 0.03 was supplied to the response units during 3 preparatory
cycles. The network was then given external inputs corresponding to the
stimulus and attentional input (as well as maintaining exti  0.03 for
response units). exti was set to 0.15 for all relevant stimulus units. The
input to the three attentional units was modulated across trials according to
the degree of conflict experienced on previous trials. Specifically, exti to
the center attentional unit was given by:
extcenter   extcenter t  1   1     E t  1    ,
where extcenter(t  1) is the external input to the center attention unit on the
previous trial,  ,  , and  are constants set to 0.5, 4.41, and 1.08,
respectively, and E(t  1) is the total energy (Hopfield, 1982) in the
response layer on the previous trial. The energy (conflict) at each time step,
t, was calculated as  ¥¥ acti * actj * wij, where i and j are indexed over
all units in the response layer, giving:
energyt   2 * (actr,H,t * actr,S,t *  3),
where actr,H,t and actr,S,t are the activation levels of the response units
corresponding to the H and S stimuli, respectively, at time step t. Thus,
energy is calculated as the product of activation of the two response units
at time step t, multiplied by the strength of the lateral inhibition between
them. Energy, constrained to be 	 0, was summed across all time steps of
a trial to give E(t).
extcenter was constrained to lie between 1 and 3. exti to flanker attention
units was given by:
extflanker   3  extcenter /2.
The activation of a unit was calculated from its net input as follows:
If neti  0, the change in activation on that time step was given by:


acti   actmax  acti * neti   acti  actrest * decay .
If neti  0, the change in activation was given by:


acti   acti  actmin * neti   acti  actrest * decay ,
where actmax, actmin, and actrest are the maximum, minimum, and resting
activations of the units, set to 1.0,  0.2, and  0.1, respectively. Decay was
a constant set to 0.1. If acti  actmax, acti was set equal to actmax. Similarly,
if acti  actmin, acti was set equal to actmin. The gain of a unit was
manipulated by multiplying its net input by a constant scaling factor.
Multiplying the net input by a constant value greater than 1 increases the
rate at which the unit approaches actmax (or actmin, if the net input to the
unit is inhibitory), thus capturing the notion that gain of the unit has
increased. Scaling the net input by a value less than 1 results in a
corresponding reduction in the rate at which actmax is approached, resulting
in reduced gain.
A response was recorded if the activation of either response unit ex￾ceeded a prespecified response threshold (0.18, except where noted). The
model continued to process until the end of the 50 cycle run, regardless of
the time at which the response was made. However, external input to the
model was stopped after a smaller number of cycles (M  6.0 cycles; SD 
0.5 cycles). This was done to keep the amount of post-response processing
relatively constant across trials with different RTs and was also used to
simulate the idea that participants in experiments do not continue to
process indefinitely after they have responded.
There were excitatory connections between layers and inhibitory con￾nections within layers of the network. The connection weights, except
where noted in the text, were as follows: feedforward excitatory connec￾tions from stimulus to response units  1.5; bidirectional excitatory
connections between the stimulus and attention units  2.0; stimulus layer
lateral inhibition   2.0; response layer lateral inhibition   3.0; atten￾tion layer lateral inhibition   1.0. Note that each stimulus unit had
mutual inhibitory connections with all other stimulus units. Similarly, each
attentional unit laterally inhibited both other attentional units.
Received August 17, 2001
Revision received August 21, 2003
Accepted October 29, 2003 
959 RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERRORS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers. 
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.